There are good things about being President. One of the good things is that the President lives in a big white house called the White House. Another good thing about being President is that the President has a swimming pool, bowling alley, and movie theater. The President never has to take out the garbage. The President doesn’t have to eat yucky vegetables. As a boy, George Bush had to eat broccoli. When George Bush grew up, he became President. That was the end of the broccoli. One of the bad things about being President is that the President always has to be dressed up. William McKinley wore a frock coat, vest, pin-stripped trousers, stiff white shirt, black satin tie, gloves, a top hat, and a red carnation in his buttonhole every day. The President has to be polite to everyone. The President can’t go anywhere alone. The President has lots of homework. People get mad at the President. Someone once threw a cabbage at William Howard Taft. That didn’t bother Taft. He quipped, “I see that one of my adversaries has lost his head.” Lots of people want to be President. If you want to be President, it might help if your name is James. Six Presidents were named James. (President Carter liked to be called Jimmy). There were four Johns, four Williams (President Clinton liked to be called Bill), two Georges, two Andrews, and two Franklins – all became President. You probably weren’t born in a log cabin. That’s too bad. People are crazy about log-cabin Presidents. They elected eight. William Harrison was born in a big Virginia mansion, though he won the election with a “log cabin and hard cider” slogan. If you want to be President, your size doesn’t matter. Presidents have come in all shapes and sizes. Abraham Lincoln was the tallest – six feet four inches. (His stovepipe hat made him look even taller.) James Madison was the smallest – five feet four inches and only one hundred pounds. William Howard Taft was the biggest – more than three hundred pounds. He was so big that he had a special tub built for his White House bathroom. (Four men could fit in the tub!) Maybe Taft’s problem was that Presidents can order any food they want. Andrew Johnson once served his guests turtle soup, oysters, fish, beef, turkey, chicken, mutton chops, mushrooms, string beans, duck, partridges, pudding, jellies, and lots of wine. All at one dinner. Though the Constitution says you’ll have to wait until you’re thirty-five, young, old, and in between have become President. Theodore (Teddy) Roosevelt at forty-two was the youngest. He had pillow fights with his children and played football on the White House lawn. Ronald Reagan was the oldest. When he first ran for President, he wad sixty-nine. He joked that it was the thirtieth anniversary of his thirty-ninth birthday. Some Presidents joked and some didn’t – Presidents’ personalities have all been different. William McKinley was so nice that he tried to stop a mob from attacking the man who had just shot him. Don’t worry about your looks. Abraham Lincoln was a homely man, but he was one of our best Presidents. William Hardy was a handsome man, but he was one of our worst presidents. Do you have pesky brothers and sisters? Every one of our Presidents did. Benjamin Harrison had eleven! (It’s lucky he grew up on a six-hundred-acre farm.) Do you have a pet? All kinds of pets have lived in the White House. Theodore Roosevelt’s children just didn’t have pets, they ran a zoo. They had dogs, cats, guinea pigs, snakes, mice, rats, badgers, raccoons, parrots, and a Shetland pony. Some Presidents played a musical instrument. Some knew how to dance. Some played sports, and some went to college. Andrew Johnson couldn’t read until he was fourteen! He didn’t learn to write until after he was married! Almost any job can lead to the White House. Presidents have been lawyers, teachers, farmers, sailors, engineers, surveyors, mayors, governors, congressmen, senators, and ambassadors. Harry Truman owned a men’s store. Andrew Jackson was a tailor. Ronald Regan was a movie actor. Every single President has taken this oath: “I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the office of President of the United States, and will do to the best of my ability, preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States.” Tall, short, fat, thin, talkative, quiet, vain, humble, lawyer, teacher, or soldier – this is what most of our Presidents have tried to do, each in his own way. Some succeeded. Some failed. So if you want to be President – a good President – pattern yourself after the best. Our best have had the courage, spirit, and will to do what they knew was right. Most of all, their first priority has always been the people and the country they served.