Mars is very cold and very dry. Scattered across the surface are many giant volcanoes. Lava covers much of the land. In Mars’ northern half, or hemisphere, is a huge raised area. It is about 2,500 miles wide. Astronomers call this the Great Tharsis Bulge. There are four mammoth volcanoes on the Great Tharsis Bulge. The largest one is Mount Olympus, or Olympus Mons. It is the biggest mountain on Mars. Some think it may be the largest mountain in the entire solar system. Mount Olympus is 15 miles high. At its peak is a 50 mile wide basin. Its base is 375 miles across. That’s nearly as big as the state of Texas! Mauna Loa, in Hawaii, is the largest volcano on earth. Yet, compared to Mount Olympus, Mauna Loa looks like a little hill. The Hawaiian volcano is only 5½ miles high. Its base, on the bottom of the Pacific Ocean, is just 124 miles wide. Each of the three other volcanoes in the Great Tharsis Bulge are over 10 miles high. They are named Arsia Mons, Pavonis Mons, and Ascraeus Mons.
Using the space station as a jumping-off point will save a tremendous amount of fuel. Earth's gravity is strongest right at the surface. The high-er you go, the weaker the pull of gravity and the less fuel that is needed. When all is ready, the people on the space sta-tion will launch a cargo ship without astronauts. The cargo ship will carry fuel and supplies. It will also carry a smaller craft to land on Mars. The cargo ship will go into orbit around Mars. After it is in place, an eight-person crew will blast off from the space station in another spaceship. The crew will attach their ship to the cargo ship. Some of the crew members will remain in the cargo craft. They will be ready to help in an emer-gency. The other astronauts will climb into the landing craft and fly down to the surface of Mars. These astronauts will explore the Red Planet. Dressed in space suits, they will collect samples, run experiments, make observations, and learn how to survive on Mars. After about a month, the astronauts on Mars will use the landing craft again. This time it will lift them off the surface of Mars to join up with the cargo ship. Then they will all rocket back to the space station. From there they can take the short, easy flight home. 
