Great whirling storms roar out of the oceans in many parts of the world. They are called by several names—hurricane, typhoon, and cyclone are the three most familiar ones. But no matter what they are called, they are all the same sort of storm. They are born the same way, in tropical waters. They develop the same way, feeding on warm, moist air. And they do the same kind of damage, both ashore and at sea. Other storms may cover a bigger area or have higher winds, but none can match both the size and the fury of hurricanes. They are earth’s mightiest storms. Like all storms, they take place in the atmosphere, the envelope of air that surrounds the earth and presses on its surface. The pressure at any one place is always changing. There are days when air is sinking and the atmosphere presses harder on the surface. These are times of high pressure. There are days when a lot of air is rising and the atmosphere does not press down as hard. These are times of low pressure. Low-pressure areas over warm oceans give birth to hurricanes. No one knows exactly what happens to start these storms. But when conditions are right, warm, moist air is set in motion. It begins to rise rapidly from the surface of the ocean in a low-pressure area. Like water in a hose, air flows from where there is more pressure to where there is less pressure. And so air over the surface of the ocean flows into the low-pressure area, picking up moisture as it travels. This warm, moist air soars upward. As the air rises above the earth, it cools. The cooling causes moisture to condense into tiny droplets of water that form clouds. As the moisture condenses, it gives off heat. Heat is one kind of energy. It is the energy that powers the storm. The clouds are the source of the storm’s rain. The low-pressure area acts like a chimney— warm air is drawn in at the bottom, rises in a column, cools, and spreads out. As the air inside rises and more air is drawn in, the storm grows. The air being drawn in, however, does not travel in a straight line. The earth’s surface is rotating, and the rotation causes the path to curve. The air travels in a spiral within the storm. In the Northern Hemisphere, the spiraling winds travel counterclockwise—the opposite of the way the hands on a clock move. In the Southern Hemisphere, they travel clockwise. Most of these storms die out within hours or days of their birth. Only about one out of ten grows into a hurricane. Today rugged planes carry many instruments into hurricanes as they near land. The instruments measure winds, temperatures, and humidity. They measure the water content of clouds. They photograph the inside of hurricanes. They record radar images of the storms. In April 1960, the first weather satellite rocketed into orbit. Now scientists hoped to find and track tropical storms before they neared land. They were rewarded almost at once. A few days after its launching, the satellite discovered a typhoon in the South Pacific. Satellite instruments do not see into the heart of a hurricane—that work is still done by planes. Satellites show the size of the storm and its growth. They show changes in the size of the eye: if the eye is growing bigger, the storm is weakening; if it is growing smaller, the storm is strengthening. Most important, satellites can pinpoint the location of a storm, record its speed, and track it closely.