Play-Doh began as a product for cleaning wallpaper. The seesaw was first used as a prop in the bloody spectacle in the arenas of ancient Rome. Long ago there were kites so large that people could be flown on them. Behind every toy there is a story. But some toys have far stranger stories than others. Only those toys that had the most surprising and unbelievable origins are found in this book. Even though we know generally where and when a given toy was made, the chapters of this book are not in chronological order because there are all sorts of ways in which toys and their histories overlap. For example, tops have been around much longer than today's action figures—but action figures are a type of doll, and dolls were invented thousands of years before tops. So, really, there is no way to put the history of toys into a simplified order. In 1976, a time capsule was buried in Washington, D.C. Inside the capsule are dozens of toys from the last century. In 2076, exactly one hundred years later, it will be opened. People then will marvel at the wonderful jumble of toys and see how we lived, how we dressed, and what we believed. Just as we are now, they will be amused and surprised by the toys they find, and from them, fry to better understand the past. It was a mistake. A goof-up. An invention that didn't work A flop; that's what the Slinky was, at least in the beginning. In 1945, an engineer by the name of Richard James was hard at work in a Philadelphia shipyard. The U.S. Navy had hired him to invent a stabilizing device for its ships. When a ship is plowing through the waves at sea, it pitches and plunges and rocks every which way. And its navigational instruments do, too. Richard's job was to come up with something that would counterbalance the instruments so that they would be level at all times. Springs. Richard believed that some sort of arrangement of springs would do the trick He tried all different types and sizes, and put them together in every conceivable way. For weeks he toiled, making dozens of different devices. But none of them worked. In fact, he never did come up with the item the Navy had hired him to invent. But one day Richard accidentally knocked a large experimental spring off a shelf. It should have just plopped to the floor. Instead, it walked down. Crawled, really. Coil by coil, end over end, it descended onto a stack of books ... then down to a desktop ... down to a chair ... and from there to the floor, where it gathered itself back together. He tried it again and again. Each time, the same thing happened. 
Some inventions popped up in different parts of the world at different times—but nobody knows for sure where and when they first originated. One of these is the seesaw. The Polynesians, Egyptians, Germans, Greeks, and Chinese all had versions of the seesaw (or teeter-totter, as it is also called). The Romans were the first, however, to set down any written record of them. Seesaws, it seems, were used in ancient Roman circuses—which had very violent exhibitions. Boxing matches to the death, crucifixions, military battles in which the soldiers actually killed each other—these were all part of the Roman circus events. Almost every act was brutal, and that goes for their seesaw act as well. Here's how it worked. In the middle of the arena a large seesaw was set up; at either end of the device was a basket big enough to hold a man. Two clowns were then shoved out into the arena. As fast as they could, they ran to the seesaw and hopped into the baskets—just as a lion was set free from a cage. The lion, which hadn't been fed for days, charged the seesaw. When it came toward one of the downs, he would push off the ground and up into the air. Then the animal would race toward the other down in the basket on the ground. And that down would immediately push off and shoot up, out of reach of the ravenous lion. Up and down they would go. The spectators thought this was great fun. For the downs, however, it wasn't fun at all. Eventually, they began to tire. One would sadly end up as a basket of food for the lion.
