More than 200 years after the Spanish had first encountered Natchez-related tribes along the southern Mississippi flood plains, European trappers and settlers seeking furs and good farmland began moving west of the Alleghenies into the Ohio River Valley. They discovered beautiful land, broad and lush with rolling prairies, acres upon acres of grasslands, and deep woods filled with game animals and fine trees. Along the way they came across numerous Indian camps and settlements where they stopped to trade and gain information about these new lands. Some of the Shawnee, Illini, and Miami Indians lived in summer camps along the fertile floodplains, where they tended cornfields and fished in the rivers. Other times the new corners encountered bands of hunters and traders, and Indian families in the winter camps making maple syrup and maple sugar. Amidst these abundant natural resources, the newcomers also discovered strange earthen forms all across the land. There were steep conical mounds and long linear earthworks, like giant snakes, enclosing some mounds. There were huge, steep platform mounds that were flat on top and even mounds in animal and human shapes. Who had built these mysterious earthworks the newcomers wondered? The Shawnee and Miami Indians living in these regions could not explain who had created them. An old Lenape (Delaware) legend told of how the Lenape and Iroquois People had attacked and driven an ancient powerful nation south of the Ohio River, who left behind the massive mounds. Others believed these were actually Cherokee ancestors, whose legends relate a southeastern migration from the Ohio valley. 
These massive earthworks seemed to be very old and otherworldly. Trees, hundreds of years old, grew up through some of them, so many observers surmised that they must have been created by a lost race" that had vanished before the Shawnee and Miami came to live there. A few even suggested that extraterrestrials had made the great earthworks as landing devices. Most were convinced that the mounds were too sophisticated and the earthworks too mathematically correct to have been made by Indians. Evidently they had not seen or heard about the Natchez' mounds de Soto had come across, or if they had, they did not see the connection between those and the more massive and impressive mounds. Yet all could feel the sacred geography of the mounds!
