Horses don't talk of course, but they communicate in other ways. They recognize each other by their scent. Friendly horses often groom each other by nuzzling their manes and necks. A horse moves its eyes and ears to show what it is feeling. When a horse lays back its ears and shows the whites of its eyes, it is angry or frightened. When the horse points its ears forward, it is interested in some object. When the horse lowers its ears, it is relaxed or sleeping. You can also tell that a horse is upset when it stamps a hind leg, shakes its head, and swishes its tail. Horses also make sounds such as neighing, nickering, and snorting. The sounds seem to show how the horse is feeling. Stallions try to show who is dominant (the leader) by fighting, rearing, and stabbing their front hooves or biting the neck of the other horse. Horses can sense when people are frightened or angry, perhaps by their smell. Touching, patting, and grooming build trust between a human and a horse.
Horses move in four natural ways, called gaits or paces. They walk, trot, canter, and gallop. The walk is the slowest gait and the gallop is the fastest. When a horse walks, each hoof leaves the ground at a different time. It moves one hind leg first, and then the front leg on the same side; then the other hind leg and the other front leg. When a horse walks, its body swings gently with each stride. When a horse trots, its legs move in pairs, left front leg with right hind leg, and right front leg with left hind leg. When a horse canters, the hind legs and one front leg move together, and then the hind legs and the other foreleg move together. The gallop is like a much faster walk, where each hoof hits the ground one after another. When a horse gallops, all four of its hooves may be flying off the ground at the same time. Horses are usually described by their coat colors and by the white markings on their faces, bodies, legs, and hooves. Brown horses range in color from dark brown bays and chestnuts to golden browns, such as palominos, and lighter browns such as roans and duns. Partly colored horses are called pintos or paints. Colorless, pure-white horses—albinos—are rare. Most horses that look white are actually gray. Skewbalds have brown-and-white patches. Piebalds have black and white patches. Spotteds have dark spots on a white coat or white spots on a dark coat.
In the 1800s, horses were used to transport settlers traveling westward across America in wagon trains, groups of horse-drawn covered wagons called prairie schooners. For centuries, horses have played a vital role in American history. Modern industry would not have been possible without the use of horse-power. Before the invention of steam engines and gasoline engines, horses turned the wheels that provided power for machines in factories. This is how products such as cotton materials, flour, and iron were manufactured. Horses pulled barges along canals and hauled fire engines, wagons, stage-coaches, and buses. In mines and forests, horses carried ore and logs. Like most Amish people, this lady still uses a horse-drawn plow. Today, machines mainly do the work that horses once did. But "horsepower" is still the term used to measure the pulling strength of a car, train, or plane engine. It seems that horses will always be with people in one way or another.
