ONE HOT DAY in 1850, a man staggered out of woods, looked about him to get his bearings, and plunged down a lane toward the river. He had only a few moments of freedom before he heard the baying of hounds. But those few minutes were all he needed to splash up to his knees in the shallow stream and wade, half crouching, under the willow trees, then turn swiftly in the opposite direction. At length he submerged himself in the water, breathing through a hollow reed he held in his hand. The dogs tried desperately to pick up the scent but the water had destroyed it. Since the man had created a false scent before doubling back on his tracks, the shouting men and the milling dogs raced up the stream in the opposite direction. After a safe interval, the man scrambled up the bank and sat panting and shaking with nerves. He knew he had no time to waste. It was growing dark, and the darkness would help him. He waded across the stream and ran, crouching, through the cotton fields until he reached a footpath. The only guide he had was the North Star. The only friend he could trust in the whole world was himself. Yet his skin was black and this fact might betray him. The man was a fugitive slave and the entire law was arrayed against him. The roads were patrolled by armed men on horseback who kept a watch for such as he. Patrols shot first and asked questions second. The North Star was his hope . . . north . . . keep going north and eventually, if you do not die, you will find freedom. The man had had the nails of one foot torn out because he had tried to run away before. The toes ached now but he scarcely felt the pain. All night he stumbled through underbrush, ran along the side of the road. When he saw the first light of dawn, he drew some water from a well. Before he could lower the bucket again, a voice whispered. What you doing here? What you want? For answer, he struck out his fist, not even waiting to learn whether the questioner was white or Negro. Wait— you're a fool! The voice said more urgently. You can't get away in the daytime. Lay over. I'll get you some breakfast The voice belonged to a black man. Those two who crouched by the well, looking at each other, were both slaves. They understood without further words.
The runaway—we'll call him Jeb—spent the day hidden in an unused pigpen in the woods. He ate and slept. At night, his friend brought him some sow back and corn bread and showed him a short cut through the woods. He could not tell Jeb how far he was from the "North." Only Jeb's torn and exhausted feet and his fear could give him any sense of the distance. For another ten days Jeb lived in deadly danger. He existed as best he could. He once ate poisonous berries and nearly died, with no one to help. The next day he crept on a bare two miles, but he was not defeated. His pants were torn, his shirt was frayed. A slave gave him a better pair of pants. A woman flung him a coat. A white woman. . . . Another white woman saw him in a field, ducking down behind a wall. She had in her hand a bowl of table scraps for the chickens. She put the bowl on the wall and called softly, "Come and get it." A slave told him he was in Kentucky, close to the Ohio River. He almost fainted. Get across that river, and he'd be in the Promised Land—almost. Swim, his black friend told him. Ain't hard. Fix to cross over at Ripley and you'll see a light burning on a hill. That's friends. You won't have to worry no more. Jeb came to the river at twilight. Nothing ever looked so wide or so wet. Hiding in bushes, he stared at the river and then he lifted his eyes to the hills. He continued to stare at the hills. With the first darkness, a light flickered high on the crest of the hill. A friend or a decoy? He took the risk and slipped into the water. For a man who was weak and exhausted it was a hard swim. When he climbed out on the other bank he did not know whether he would be able to climb that hill. Over and over he repeated to himself: freedom freedom— freedom. It was the most beautiful sound in the world. In the state of Ohio were no slave whips, no slave shackles, no slave men. It gave Jeb strength. He climbed the steep road, and he stood for a moment by the garden gate looking south across that flowing river. He'd never go back.
The family who lived beyond the garden gate was named Rankin. Seven tall sons and a father were prepared at any time of the day or night to pass along a runaway. They passed this one along. But first they gave Jeb a meal, made him a bed of straw in the bottom of a wagon, and then, in the dead of night, a Rankin son hitched up the team and drove through the rutty darkness to the home of a friend. The friend was unsurprised and prepared. Since it was now nearly dawn, he hid Jeb in his barn, but that night he hitched up his team and drove Jeb another thirty miles. In Canada lay the only true safety, for slave masters and slave laws could reach into the North with a long arm. Five more days of hazard and hardship, of tenderness, care, and brotherly love, and then the wide expanse of Lake Erie danced in the sunlight. Jeb was smuggled aboard a ship and hidden under sacks of grain. When he stepped off the ship, he was a free man. 
This was the desire for freedom which sent more than two thousand slaves out of the South every year. This was the Underground Railroad. Slavery had lain like a terrible sore on our country for two hundred years. Many were ashamed of it. The black Africans who were enslaved fought against it from the start. Men like Thomas Jefferson, preparing the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, tried to have slavery outlawed. It was well on its way to extinction when a machine was invented in the late eighteenth century. The cotton gin. This machine cleaned five hundred pounds of cotton a day instead of the five that a man could do by hand. To grow the cotton to feed the machine, plantation owners needed labor—cheap labor. That settled the fate of slavery. To abolish slavery meant to abolish profits which were astronomical, profits which were shared North and South. But not to abolish slavery struck at some of the deepest principles of Americans. For the next sixty years—until the crash of the Civil War—no issue was as important as slavery. It divided homes, it spoke for the conscience, it made political parties, it challenged religion, it turned men into brutes and it turned men into heroes. It created the Underground Railroad. The first slave who helped a fellow slave to escape drove the first spike in this invisible railroad. The unknown first fugitive, the softly stepping men and women who dared the dangers of swamps and mountains and of cold and rain, the outstretched hands of friends, the disguises, the courage, the gunshots along the border, and a long invisible "train" which chugged so silently and sent up such invisible smoke—all these proved in the end irresistible. It was they which really broke the chains of slavery.
