'Little Man, would you come on! You keep it up and you're gonna make us late.' My youngest brother paid no attention to me. Grasping more firmly his newspaper-wrapped notebook and his tin can lunch of cornbread and oil sausages, he continued to concentrate on the dusty road. He lagged several feet behind my other brothers, Stacey and Christopher-John, and me, attempting to keep the rusty Mississippi dust from swelling with each step and drifting back upon his shiny black shoes and the cuffs of his corduroy pants by lifting each foot high before setting it gently down again. Always meticulously neat, six-year old Little Man never allowed dirt or tears or stains to mar anything he owned. Today was no exception. 'You keep it up and make us late for school, Mama's gonna wear you out.' I threatened, pulling with exasperation at the high collar of the Sunday dress Mama had made me wear for the first day of school - as if that event were something special. it seemed to me that showing up at school at all on a bright August-like October morning made for running the cool forest trails and wading barefoot in the forest pond was concession enough; Sunday clothing was asking too much. Christopher-John and Stacey were not too pleased about the clothing or school either. Only Little Man, just beginning his school career, found the prospects of both intriguing. 'Y'all go ahead and get dirty if y'all wanna,' he replied without even looking up from his studied steps, 'Me, I'm gonna stay clean.' ‘I betcha Mama's gonna "clean" you, you keep it up.' I grumbled. ‘Ah, Cassie, leave him be,' Stacey admonished, frowning and kicking testily at the road. ‘I ain't said nothing but..’ Stacey cut me a wicked look and I grew silent. His disposition had been irritatingly sour lately. If I hadn't known the cause of it. I could have forgotten very easily that he was at twelve, bigger than I, and that I had promised Mama to arrive at school looking clean and ladylike. 'Shoot,' I mumbled finally, unable to restrain myself from further comment, 'it ain't my fault you gotta be in Mama's class this year.' Stacey's frown deepened and he jammed his fists into his pockets, but said nothing. Christopher-John, walking between Stacey and me, glanced uneasily at both of us but did not interfere. A short, round boy of seven, he took little interest in troublesome things, preferring to remain on good terms with everyone, Yet he was always sensitive to others and now, shifting the handle of his lunch can from his right hand to his right wrist and his smudged notebook from his left hand to his left armpit. he stuffed his free hands into his pockets and attempted to make his face as moody as Stacey's and as cranky as mine. But after a few moments he seemed to forget that he was supposed to be grouchy and began whistling cheerfully. There was little that could make Christopher-John unhappy for very long, not even the thought of school. I tugged again at my collar and dragged my feet in the dust, allowing it to sift back onto my socks and shoes like gritty red snow. I hated the dress. And the shoes. There was little I could do in a dress, and as for shoes, they imprisoned freedomloving feet accustomed to the feel of the warm earth, ‘Cassie, stop that,' Stacey snapped as the dust billowed in swirling clouds around my feet. I looked up sharply, ready to protest. Christopher-John's whistling increased to a raucous, nervous shrill. and grudgingly T let the matter drop and trudged along in moody silence, my brothers growing as pensively quiet as I. Before us the narrow, sun-splotched road wound like a lazy red serpent dividing the high forest bank of quiet, old trees on the left from the cotton field, forested by giant green-and-purple stalks. on the right. A barbed-wire fence ran the length of the deep field, stretching eastward for over a quarter of a mile until it met the sloping green pasture that signaled the end of our family's four hundred acres, An ancient oak tree on the slope, visible even now, was the official dividing mark between Logan land and the beginning of a dense forest. Beyond the protective fencing of the forest, vast farming fields, worked by a multitude of share- cropping families, covered two-thirds of a ten-square-mile plantation. That was Harlan Granger land. Once our land had been Granger land too, but the Grangers had sold it during Reconstruction to a Yankee for tax money. In 1887, when the land was up for sell again, Grandpa had bought two hundred acres of it, and in 19I8, after the first two hundred acres had been paid off, he had bought another two hundred, It was good rich land, much of it still virgin forest, and there was no debt on half of it. But there was a mortgage on the two hundred acres bought in 1918 and there were taxes on the full four hundred, and for the past three years there had not been enough money from the cotton to pay both and live on too. That was why Papa had gone to work on the railroad. In 1930 the price of cotton dropped, And so, in the spring of 1931, Papa set out looking for work, going as far north as Memphis and as far south as the Delta country, He had gone west too, into Louisiana. It was there he found work laying track for the railroad. He worked the remainder of the year away from us, not returning until the deep winter when the ground was cold and barren. The following spring after the planting was finished. he did the same. Now it was 1933 and Papa was again in Louisiana laying track, I asked him once why he had to go away, why the land was so important. He took my hand and said in his quiet way: 'Look out there, Cassie girl. All that belongs to you. You ain't never had to live on nobody's place but your own and long as I live and the family survives, you'll never have to. That's important. You may not understand that now, but one day you will. Then you'll see. I looked at Papa strangely when he said that, for I knew that all the land did not belong to me. Some of it belonged to Stacey, Christopher-John, and Little Man, not to mention the part that belonged to Big Ma. Mama, and Uncle Hammer, Papa's older brother who lived in Chicago. But Papa never divided the land in his mind: it was simply Logan land. For it he would work the long, hot summer pounding steel: Mama would teach and run the farm; Big Ma, in her sixties, would work like a woman of twenty in the fields and keep the house; and the boys and I would wear threadbare clothing washed to dishwater color: but always, the taxes and the mortgage would be paid. Papa said that one day I would understand. I wondered. When the fields ended and the Granger forest fanned both sides of the road with long overhanging branches, a tall, emaciated-looking boy popped suddenly from a forest trail and swung a thin arm around Stacey. It was T. J. Avery. His younger brother Claude emerged a moment later, smiling weakly as if it pained him to do so. Neither boy had on shoes, and their Sunday clothing, patched and worn, hung loosely upon their frail frames. The Avery family share- cropped on Granger land. 'Well.' said T.J.. jauntily swinging into step with Stacey, there we go again startin' another school year. 'Yeah,' sighed Stacey, 'Ah, man, don't look so down,' T.J. said cheerfully. 'Your mama's really one great teacher. I should know.' He certainly should. He had failed Mama's class last year and was now returning for a second try, 'Shoot! You can say that,' exclaimed Stacey. 'You don't have to spend all day in a classroom with your mama.' 'Look on the bright side,' said T.J. 'Jus' think of the advantage you've got. You'll be learnin' all sorts of stuff 'fore the rest of us...' He smiled slyly. 'like what's on all them tests. Stacey thrust T.J.'s arm from his shoulders. 'If that's what you think, you don't know Mama.' 'Ain't no need gettin' mad,' T.J. replied undaunted. 'Jus' an idea.' He was quiet for a moment, then announced, 'I betcha I could give y'all an earful 'bout that burnin' last night.' 'Burning I What burning?' asked Stacey. 'Man, don't y'all know nothin'! The Berrys' burnin'. I thought y'all's grandmother went over there last night to see 'bout 'em.' Of course we knew that Big Ma had gone to a sick house last night. She was good at medicines and people often called her instead of a doctor when they were sick. But we didn't know anything about any burnings, and I certainly didn't know anything about any Berrys either. 'What Berrys he talking 'bout, Stacey!' I asked. 'I don't know no Berrys. 'They live way over on the other side of Smellings Creek. They come up to church sometimes,' said Stacey absently. Then he turned back to T.J. 'Mr. Lanier come by real late and got Big Ma. Said Mr.. Berry was low sick and needed her to help nurse him, but he ain't said nothing 'bout no burning.' 'He's low sick all right ~'cause he got burnt near to death. Him and his two nephews, And you know who done 'Who!' Stacey and I asked together. 'Well, since y'all don't seem to know nothin',' said T.J., in his usual sickening way of nursing a tidbit of information to death, 'maybe I ought not tell y'all, It might hurt y'all's little ears.' 'Ah, boy,' I said, 'don't start that mess again.' I didn't like T.J. very much and his stalling around didn't help. 'Come on, T.J.,' said Stacey, 'out with it.' 'Well ...' T.J. murmured, then grew silent as if considering whether or not he should talk, We reached the first of two crossroads and turned north; another mile and we would approach the second crossroads and turn east again. Finally T.J. said, 'Okay. See, them Berrys' burnin' wasn't no accident. Some white men took a match to 'em,' 'Y-you mean just lit 'em up like a piece of wood!' stammered Christopher-John, his eyes growing big with disbelief. 'But why!' asked Stacey, T.J. shrugged. 'Don't know why. Jus' know they done it, that's all.' 'How you know !' I questioned suspiciously. He smiled smugly. ''Cause your mama come down on her way to school and talked to my mama 'bout it.' 'She did !' 'Yeah, and you should've seen the way she look when she come outa that house.' 'How'd she look!' inquired Little Man, interested enough to glance up from the road for the first time. T.J. looked around grimly and whispered. 'like... death.' He waited a moment for his words to be appropriately shocking, but the effect was spoiled by Little Man, who asked lightly, 'What does death look like !' T.J. turned in annoyance. 'Don't he know nothin'!' 'Well, what does it look like?' Little Man demanded to know. He didn't like T.J. either, 'Like my grandfather looked jus' 'fore they buried him, T.J. described all-knowingly. 'Oh.' replied Little Man, losing interest and concentrating on the road again. 'I tell ya. Stacey, man,' said T.J. morosely, shaking his head. 'sometimes I jus' don't know 'bout that family of yours. Stacey pulled back, considering whether or not T.J.'s words were offensive. but T.]. immediately erased the question by continuing amiably. 'Don't get me wrong, Stacey. They some real swell kids, but that Cassie 'bout got me whipped this mornin'. 'Good !' I said. 'Now how'd she do that !' Stacey laughed. 'You wouldn't be laughin' if it'd've happened to you. She up and told your mama 'bout me goin' up to that Wallace store dancin' room and Miz Logan told Mama.' He eyed me disdainfully then went on. 'But don't worry, I got out of it though. When Mama asked me 'bout it, I jus' said ole Claude was always sneakin' up there to get some of that free candy Mr. Kaleb give out sometimes and I had to go and get him 'cause I knowed good and well she didn't want us up there. Boy, did he get it?' T.J. laughed. 'Mama 'bout wore him out. I stared at quiet Claude. 'You let him do that!' I exclaimed. But Claude only smiled in that sickly way of his and I knew that he had. He was more afraid of T.J. than of his mother. Again Little Man glanced up and I could see his dislike for T.J. growing. Friendly Christopher-John glared at T.J., and putting his short arm around Claude's shoulder said. 'Come on, Claude. let's go on ahead.' Then he and Claude hurried up the road, away from T.J. Stacey, who generally overlooked T.J.'s underhanded stunts, shook his head. 'That was dirty. 'Well, what'd ya expect me to do! I couldn't let her think I was g-oin' up there 'cause I like to, could I! She' d've killed me!' 'And good riddance.' I thought, promising myself that if he ever pulled anything like that on me, I'd knock his block off. We were nearing the second crossroads, where deep gullies lined both sides of the road and the dense forest crept to the very edges of high. jagged, clay-walled banks. Suddenly, Stacey turned, 'Quick!' he cried. 'Off the road!' Without another word, all of us but Little Man scrambled up the steep right bank into the forest. 'Get up here, Man.' Stacey ordered, but Little Man only gazed at the ragged red bank sparsely covered with scraggly brown briars and kept on walking .'Come on, do like I say. 'But I'll get my clothes dirty i' protested Little Man. 'You're gonna get them a whole lot dirtier you stay down there. Look!' Little Man turned around and watched saucer-eyed as a bus bore down on him spewing clouds of red dust like a huge yellow dragon breathing fire. Little Man headed toward the bank, but it was too steep. He ran frantically along the road looking for a foothold and, finding one, hopped onto the bank, but not before the bus had sped past enveloping him in a scarlet haze while laughing white faces pressed against the bus windows. Little Man shook a threatening fist into the thick air, then looked dismally down at himself. 'Well, ole Little Man done got his Sunday clothes dirty, T.J. laughed as we jumped down from the bank. Angry tears welled in Little Man's eyes but he quickly brushed them away before T.J. could see them. 'Ah, shut up, T.J.,' Stacey snapped, 'Yeah, shut up. T.J.,' I echoed. 'Come on, Man,' Stacey said,' and next time do like I tell ya.' Little Man hopped down from the bank. 'How's come they did that. Stacey, huh!' he asked. dusting himself off. 'How's come they didn't even stop for us !' ''Cause they like to see us run and it ain't our bus.' Stacey said, balling his fists and jamming them tightly into his pockets. 'Well, where's our bus !' demanded Little Man. 'We ain't got one.' 'Well, why not!' 'Ask Mama,' Stacey replied as a towheaded boy, bare- footed and pale. came running down a forest path toward us. The boy quickly caught up and fell in stride with Stacey and T.J. 'Hey, Stacey,' he said shyly. 'Hey, Jeremy,' Stacey said. There was an awkward silence. 'Y'all jus' startin' school today !' 'Yeah.' replied Stacey, 'I wishin' ours was jus' startin',' sighed Jeremy. 'Ours been goin' since the end of August.' Jeremy's eyes were a whitewashed blue and they seemed to weep when he spoke. 'Yeah,' said Stacey again. Jeremy kicked the dust briskly and looked toward the north. He was a strange boy. Ever since I had begun school, he had walked with us as far as the crossroads in the morning. and met us there in the afternoon. He was often ridiculed by the other children at his school and had shown up more than once with wide red welts on his arms which Lillian Jean, his older sister, had revealed with satisfaction were the result of his associating with us. Still, Jeremy continued to meet us. When we reached the crossroads, three more children, a girl of twelve or thirteen and two boys, all looking very much like Jeremy, rushed past, The girl was Lillian Jean, 'Jeremy, come on.' she said without a backward glance, and Jeremy, smiling sheepishly, waved a timid good-bye and slowly followed her. We stood in the crossing gazing after them. Jeremy looked back once but then Lillian Jean yelled shrilly at him and he did not look back again. They were headed for the Jefferson Davis County School. a long white wooden building looming in the distance. Behind the building was a wide sports field around which were scattered rows of tiered gray-looking benches. In front of it were two yellow buses, our own tormentor and one that brought students from the other direction, and loitering students awaiting the knell of the morning bell. In the very center of the expansive front lawn, waving red, white and blue with the emblem of the Confederacy emblazoned in its upper left-hand corner. was the Mississippi nag. Directly below it was the American flag. As Jeremy and his sister and brothers hurried reward those transposed flags, we turned eastward toward our own school. The Great Faith Elementary and Secondary School, one of the largest black schools in the county, was a dismal end to an hour's journey. Consisting of four weather-beaten wooden houses on stilts of brick. 320 students, seven teachers. a principal. a caretaker, and the caretaker's cow, which kept the wide crabgrass lawn sufficiently clipped in spring and summer, the school was located near three plantations, the largest and closest by far being the Granger plantation. Most of the students were from families that sharecropped on Granger land, and the others mainly from Montier and Harrison plantation families. Because the students were needed in the fields from early spring when the cotton was planted until after most of the cotton had been picked in the fall, the school adjusted its terms accordingly, beginning in October and dismissing in March. But even so, after today a number of the older students would not be seen again for a month or two, not until the last puff of cotton had been gleaned from the fields, and eventually most would drop out of school altogether. Because of this the classes in the higher grades grew Smaller with each passing year. The class buildings, with their backs practically against the forest wall, formed a semicircle facing a small one-room church at the opposite edge of the compound. It was to this church that many of the school's students and their parents belonged. As we arrived, the enormous iron bell in the church belfry was ringing vigorously, warning the milling students that only five minutes of freedom remained. Little Man immediately pushed his way across the lawn to the well. Stacey and T.J., ignoring the rest of us now that they were on the school grounds, wandered off to be with the other seventh-grade boys, and Christopher-John and Claude rushed to reunite with their classmates of last year. Left alone, I dragged slowly to the building that held the first four grades and sat on the bottom step. Plopping my pencils and notebook into the dirt, I propped my elbows on my knees and rested my chin in the palms of my hands. 'Hey, Cassie,' said Mary Lou Wellever, the principal's daughter, as she flounced by in a new yellow dress. 'Hey, yourself,' I said, scowling so ferociously that she kept on walking. I stared after her a moment noting that she would have on a new dress. Certainly no one else did. Patches on faded pants and dresses abounded on boys and girls come so recently from the heat of the cotton fields. Girls stood awkwardly, afraid to sit, and boys pulled restlessly at starched, highbuttoned collars. Those students fortunate enough to have shoes hopped from one pinched foot to the other. Tonight the Sunday clothes would be wrapped in newspaper and hung for Sunday and the shoes would be packed away to be brought out again only when the weather turned so cold that bare feet could no longer traverse the frozen roads: but for today we all suffered. On the far side of the lawn I spied Moe Turner speeding toward the seventh-grade-class building, and wondered at his energy. Moe was one of Stacey's friends. He lived on the Montier plantation, a three-and-a-half-hour walk from the school. Because of the distance. many children from the Montier plantation did not come to Great Faith after they had finished the four-year school near Smellings Creek. But there were some girls and boys like Moe who made the trek daily, leaving their homes while the sky was black and not returning until all was blackness again. I for one was certainly glad that I didn't live that far away. I don't think my feet would have wanted that badly for me to be educated. The chiming of the second bell began. I stood up dusting my bottom as the first, second, third, and fourth graders crowded up the stairs into the hallway. Little Man flashed proudly past, his face and hands clean and his black shoes shining again. I glanced down at my own shoes powdered red and, raising my right foot, rubbed it against the back of my left leg, then reversed the procedure. As the last gong of the bell reverberated across the compound, I swooped up my pencils and notebook and ran inside. A hallway extended from the front to the back door of the building. On either side of the hallway were two door- ways. both leading into the same large room which was divided into two classrooms by a heavy canvas curtain. The second and third grades were on the left, the first and fourth grades on the right. I hurried to the rear of the building, turned to the right, and slid into a third-row bench occupied by Gracey Pearson and Alma Scott. 'You can't sit here.' objected Gracey. 'I'm saving it for Mary Lou. I glanced back at Mary Lou Wellever, depositing her lunch pail on a shelf in the back of the room and said, 'Not any more you ain't,' Miss Daisy Crocker, yellow and buckeyed, glared down at me from the middle of the room with a look that said, 'Soooooooo, it's you, Cassie Logan.' Then she pursed her lips and drew the curtain along the rusted iron rod and tucked it into a wide loop in the back wall. With the curtain drawn back, the first graders gazed quizzically at us. Little Man sat by a window, his hands folded, patiently waiting for Miss Crocker to speak. Mary Lou nudged me. 'That's my seat, Cassie Logan. 'Mary Lou Wellever,' Miss Crocker called primly, 'have a seat.' 'Yes, ma'am,' said Mary Lou, eyeing me with a look of pure hate before turning away. Miss Crocker walked stiffly to her desk, which was set on a tiny platform and piled high with bulky objects covered by a tarpaulin, She rapped the desk with a ruler, although the room was perfectly still, and said, 'Welcome, children, to Great Faith Elementary School.' Turning slightly so that she stared squarely at the left side of the room, she continued, 'To all of you fourth graders, it's good to have you in my class. I'll be expecting many good and wonderful things from you.' Then addressing the right side of the room, she said, ‘And to all our little first grade friends only today starting on the road to knowledge and education, may your tiny feet find the pathways of learning steady and forever before you.' Already bored, I stretched my right arm on the desk and rested my head in my upraised hand. Miss Crocker smiled mechanically, then rapped on her desk again. 'Now, little ones,' she said, still talking to the first grade, 'your teacher, Miss Davis, has been held up in Jackson for a few days so I'll have the pleasure of sprinkling your little minds with the first rays of knowledge.' She beamed down upon them as if she expected to be applauded for this bit of news, then with a swoop of her large eyes to include the fourth graders, she went on. 'Now since there's only one of me, we shall have to sacrifice for the next few days. We shall work, work, work. but we shall have to work like little Christian boys and girls and share, share, share. Now are we willing to do that!' 'YES'M. MIZ CROCKER,' the children chorused. But I remained silent. I never did approve of group responses. Adjusting my head in my hand, I sighed heavily, my mind on the burning of the Berrys. 'Cassie Logan!' I looked up, startled. 'Cassie Logan!' 'Yes, ma'am!' I jumped up quickly to face Miss Crocker. 'Aren't you willing to work and share !' 'Yes'm.’ ‘Then say so!' 'Yes'm,' I murmured, sliding back into my seat as Mary Lou. Gracey, and Alma giggled. Here it was only five minutes into the new school year and already I was in trouble. By ten o'clock, Miss Crocker had rearranged our seating and written our names on her seating chart. I was still sitting beside Gracey and Alma but we had been moved from the third to the first row in front of a small potbellied stove. Although being eyeball to eyeball with Miss Crocker was nothing to look forward to, the prospect of being warm once the cold weather set in was nothing to be sneezed at either, so I resolved to make the best of my rather dubious position. Now Miss Crocker made a startling announcement: 'This year we would all have books. Everyone gasped, for most of the students had never handled a book at all besides the family Bible. I admit that even I was somewhat excited. Although Mama had several books. I had never had one of my very own. 'Now we're very fortunate to get these readers,' Miss Crocker explained while we eagerly awaited the unveiling. The county superintendent of schools himself brought these books down here for our use and we must take extra-good care of them.' She moved toward her desk. 'So let's all promise that we'll take the best care possible of these new books.' She stared down, expecting our response. 'All right, all together, let's repeat, "We promise to take good care of our new books."' She looked sharply at me as she spoke. 'WE PROMISE TO TAKE GOOD CARE OF OUR NEW BOOKS!' 'Fine,' Miss Crocker beamed, then proudly threw back the tarpaulin. Sitting so close to the desk, I could see that the covers of the books, a motley red, were badly worn and that the gray edges of the pages had been marred by pencils, crayons, and ink. My anticipation at having my own book ebbed to a sinking disappointment. But Miss Crocker continued to beam as she called each fourth grader to her desk and, recording a number in her roll book, handed him or her a book. As I returned from my trip to her desk, I noticed the first graders anxiously watching the disappearing pile. Miss Crocker must have noticed them too, for as I sat down she said, 'Don't worry, little ones, there are plenty of readers for you too. See there on Miss Davis's desk.' Wide eyes turned to the covered teacher's platform directly in front of them and an audible sigh of relief swelled in the room. I glanced across at Little Man, his face lit in eager excitement. I knew that he could not see the soiled covers or the marred pages from where he sat, and even though his penchant for cleanliness was often annoying, I did not like to think of his disappointment when he saw the books as they really were. But there was nothing that I could do about it, so I opened my book to its center and began browsing through the spotted pages. Girls with blond braids and boys with blue eyes stared up at me. I found a story about a boy and his dog lost in a cave and began reading while Miss Crocker's voice droned on monotonously. Suddenly I grew conscious of a break in that monotonous tone and I looked up. Miss Crocker was sitting at Miss Davis's desk with the first-grade books stacked before her, staring fiercely down at Little Man, who was pushing a book back upon the desk. 'What's that you said, Clayton Chester Logan !' she asked. The room became gravely silent. Everyone knew that Little Man was in big trouble for no one, but no one, ever called Little Man 'Clayton Chester' unless she or he meant serious business. Little Man knew this too. His lips parted slightly as he took his hands from the book. He quivered, but he did not take his eyes from Miss Crocker.'I –I said may I have another book please, ma'am,' he squeaked. 'That one's dirty.' 'Dirty !' Miss Crocker echoed, appalled by such temerity. She stood up, gazing down upon Little Man like a bony giant, but Little Man raised his head and continued to look into her eyes. 'Dirty! And just who do you think you are, Clayton Chester! Here the county is giving us these wonderful books during these hard times and you're going to stand there and tell me that the book's too dirty! Now you take that book or get nothing at all I' Little Man lowered his eyes and said nothing as he stared at the book, For several moments he stood there, his face barely visible above the desk, then he turned and looked at the few remaining books and, seeming to realize that they were as badly soiled as the one Miss Crocker had given him. he looked across the room at me. I nodded and Little Man, glancing up again at Miss Crocker, slid the book from the edge of the desk, and with his back straight and his head up returned to his seat. Miss Crocker sat down again. 'Some people around here seem to be giving themselves airs. I’ll tolerate no more of that.' she scowled. 'Sharon Lake, come get your book. I watched Little Man as he scooted into his seat beside two other little boys. He sat for a while with a stony face looking out the window; then, evidently accepting the fact that the book in front of him was the best that he could expect, he turned and opened it. Rut as he stared at the book's inside cover, his face clouded, changing from sulky acceptance to puzzlement. His brews furrowed. Then his eyes grew wide, and suddenly he sucked in his breath and sprang from his chair like a wounded animal, hinging the book onto the floor and stomping madly upon it. Miss Crocker rushed to Little Man and grabbed him up in powerful hands. She shook him vigorously, then set him on the floor again, 'Now, just what's gotten into you, Clayton Chester!' But Little Man said nothing. He just stood staring down at the open book, shivering with indignant anger. 'Pick it up,' she ordered. 'No !' defied Little Man. 'No! I'll give you ten seconds to pick up that book, boy. or I'm going to get my switch.' Little Man bit his lower lip, and I knew that he was not going to pick up the book. Rapidly, I turned to the inside cover of my own book and saw immediately what had made Little Man so furious. Stamped on the inside cover was a chart which read: The blank lines continued down to line 20 and I knew that they had all been reserved for black students. A knot of anger swelled in my throat and held there. But as Miss Crocker directed Little Man to bend over the 'whipping chair. 1 put aside my anger and jumped up. 'Miz Crocker. don't, please !' I cried. Miss Crocker's dark eyes warned me not to say another word. 'I know why he done it !' 'You want part of this switch, Cassie !' 'No'm,' I said hastily. 'I just wanna tell you how come Little Man done what he done.' 'Sit down!' she ordered as I hurried toward her with the open book in my hand, Holding the book up to her. I said. 'See, Miz Crocker, see what it says. They give us these ole books when they didn't want'em no more. She regarded me impatiently, but did not look at the book. 'Now how could he know what it says! He can't read.' 'Yes'm, he can. He been reading since he was four. He can't read all them big words, but he can read them columns. See what's in the last row. Please look, Miz Crocker. This time Miss Crocker did look, but her face did not change. Then, holding up her head, she gazed unblinkingly down at me. 'S-see what they called us,' I said, afraid she had not seen. 'That's what you are.' she said coldly. 'Now go sit down. I shook my head, realizing now that Miss Crocker did not even know what I was talking about, She had looked at the page and had understood nothing, 'I said sit down. Cassie !' I started slowly toward my desk, but as the hickory stick sliced the tense air. I turned back around. 'Miz Crocker,' I said, 'I don't want my book neither. The switch landed hard upon Little Man's upturned bottom. Miss Crocker looked questioningly at me as I reached up to her desk and placed the book upon it. Then she swung the switch five more times and, discovering that Little Man had no intention of crying, ordered him up. 'All right, Cassie,' she sighed, turning to me, 'come on and get yours.' By the end of the school day I had decided that I would tell Mama everything before Miss Crocker had a chance to do so. From nine years of trial and error, I had learned that punishment was always less severe when I poured out the whole truth to Mama on my own before she had heard anything from anyone else. I knew that Miss Crocker had not spoken to Mama during the lunch period, for she had spent the whole hour in the classroom preparing for the afternoon session. As soon as class was dismissed I sped from the room, weaving a path through throngs of students happy to be free. But before I could reach the seventh-grade-class building. I had the misfortune to collide with Mary Lou's father. Mr. Wellever looked down on me with surprise that I would actually bump into him, then proceeded to lecture me on the virtues of watching where one was going. Meanwhile Miss Crocker briskly crossed the lawn to Mama's class building. By the time I escaped Mr. Wellever, she had already disappeared into the darkness of the hallway, Mama's classroom was in the back, I crept silently along the quiet hall and peeped cautiously into the open doorway, Mama, pushing a strand of her long, crinkly hair back into the chignon at the base of her slender neck, was seated at her desk watching Miss Crocker thrust a book before her, 'Just look at that. Mary,' Miss Crocker said, thumping the book twice with her forefinger. 'A perfectly good book ruined. Look at that broken binding and those foot marks all over it.' Mama did not speak as she studied the book. 'And here's the one Cassie wouldn't take.' she said, placing a second book on Mama's desk with an outraged slam. 'At least she didn't have a tantrum and stomp all over hers. I tell you, Mary. I just don't know what got into those children today. I always knew Cassie was rather high-strung, but Little Man! He's always such a perfect little gentle- man.' Mama glanced at the book I had rejected and opened the front cover so that the offensive pages of both books faced her. 'You say Cassie said it was because of this front page that she and Little Man didn't want the books !' Mama asked quietly. 'Yes, ain't that something!' Miss Crocker said, forgetting her teacher-training-school diction in her indignation. 'The very idea! That's on all the books, and why they got so upset about it I'll never know.' 'You punish them!' asked Mama, glancing up at Miss Crocker. 'Well, I certainly did ! Whipped both of them good with my hickory stick. Wouldn't you have!' When Mama did not reply, she added defensively, 'I had a perfect right to.' 'Of course you did. Daisy.' Mama said, turning back to the books again. 'They disobeyed you.' But her tone was so quiet and noncommittal that I knew Miss Crocker was not satisfied with her reaction. 'Well, I thought you would've wanted to know, Mary, in case you wanted to give them a piece of your mind also.' Mama smiled up at Miss Crocker and said rather absently, ‘Yes, of course, Daisy. Thank you.' Then she opened her desk drawer and pulled out some paper, a pair of scissors. and a small brown bottle. Miss Crocker, dismayed by Mama's seeming unconcern for the seriousness of the matter, thrust her shoulders back and began moving away from the desk. ‘You understand that if they don't have those books to study from, I’ll have to fail them in both reading and composition, since i plan to base all my lessons around -' She stopped abruptly and stared in amazement at Mama. ‘Mary, what in the world are you doing!' Mama did not answer. She had trimmed the paper to the size of the books and was now dipping a gray-looking glue from the brown bottle onto the inside cover of one of the books. Then she took the paper and placed it over the glue. 'Mary Logan, do you know what you're doing! That book belongs to the county. If somebody from the superintendent's office ever comes down here and sees that book, you'll be in real trouble.' Mama laughed and picked up the other book. 'In the first place no one cares enough to come down here, and in the second place if anyone should come, maybe he could see all the things we need - current books for all of our subjects, not just somebody's old throwaways, desks, paper, black- boards, erasers, maps, chalk ...' Her voice trailed off as she glued the second book. 'Biting the hand that feeds you. That's what you're doing, Mary Logan, biting the hand that feeds you.' Again, Mama laughed. 'If that's the case. Daisy, T don't think I need that little bit of food.' With the second book finished, she stared at a small pile of seventh-grade books on her desk. 'Well, I just think you're spoiling those children, Mary. They've got to learn how things are sometime.' 'Maybe so,' said Mama, ‘but that doesn't mean they have to accept them ... and maybe we don't either.' Miss Crocker gazed suspiciously at Mama. Although Mama had been a teacher at Great Faith for fourteen years, ever since she had graduated from the Crandon Teacher Training School at nineteen, she was still considered by many of the other teachers as a disrupting maverick. Her ideas were always a bit too radical and her statements a bit too pointed. The fact that she had not grown up in Spokane County but in the Delta made her even more suspect, and the more traditional. thinkers like Miss Crocker were wary of her. ‘Well, if anyone ever does come from the county and sees Cassie's and Little Man's books messed up like that,' she said, ‘I certainly won't accept the responsibility for them. 'It will be easy enough for anyone to see whose responsibility it is, Daisy, by opening any seventh-grade book. Because tomorrow I'm going to "mess them up" too. Miss Crocker, finding nothing else to say, turned imperiously and headed for the door. I dashed across the hall and awaited her exit, then crept back. Mama remained at her desk, sitting very still. For a long time she did not move. When she did, she picked up one of the seventh-grade books and began to glue again. I wanted to go and help her, but something warned me that now was not the time to make my presence known, and I left. I would wait until the evening to talk to her; there was no rush now. She understood. Two 'Cassie, you better watch yourself, girl,' Big Ma cautioned, putting one rough, large hand against my back to make sure I didn't fall. I looked down at my grandmother from midway up one of the wooden poles Papa had set out to mark the length of the cotton field. Big Ma was Papa's mother, and like him she was tall and strongly built. Her clear, smooth skin was the color of a pecan shell. 'Ah, Big Ma, I ain't gonna fall.' I scoffed, then climbed onto the next strong spike and reached for a fibrous puff at the top of a tall cotton stalk. 'You she' better not fall, girl,' grumbled Big Ma. 'Sometimes I wish we had more low cotton like down 'round Vicksburg. I don't like y'all children climbin' them things.' She looked around, her hand on her hip. Christopher-John and Little Man farther down the field balanced skillfully on lower spikes of their own poles plucking the last of the cot- ton, but Stacey, too heavy now to climb the poles, was forced to remain on the ground. Big Ma eyed us all again, then with a burlap bag slung across her right shoulder and dangling at the left side of her waist she moved down the row toward Mama. ‘Mary, child. I think with what we picked today we oughta have ourselves another bale.' Mama was stooped over a low cotton branch. She stuffed one last puff into her bag and straightened. She was tawny- colored, thin and sinewy, with delicate features in a strong- jawed face, and though almost as tall as Big Ma, she seemed somewhat dwarfed beside her. 'I expect you're right, Mama,' she said. ‘Come Monday, we'd better haul it up to the Granger place and have it ginned. Then we can - Cassie, what's the matter !' I didn't answer Mama. I had moved to the very top of my pole and could now see above the field to the road where two figures, one much taller than the other, were walking briskly. As the men rounded a curve in the road, they became more distinct. There was in the easy fluid gait of the shorter man a familiarity that made me gasp. I squinted, shadowing my eyes from the sun, then slipped like lightning down the pole. 'Cassie!' 'It's Papa!' 'David!' Mama questioned unbelievingly as Christopher- John and Little Man descended eagerly and dashed after Stacey and me toward the barbed-wire fence. 'Don't y'all go through that fence!' Big Ma called after us. But we pretended not to hear. We held the second and third rows of the prickly wire wide for each other to climb through: then all four of us sped down the road toward Papa. When Papa saw us, he began running swiftly, easily, like the wind. Little Man, the first to reach him, was swept lightly upward in Papa's strong hands as Christopher-John, Stacey, and I crowded around. 'Papa, what you doing home!' asked Little Man. Putting Little Man down, Papa said, ‘Just had to come home and see 'bout my babies.' He hugged and kissed each of us, then stood back. ‘Just look at y'all,' he said proudly. 'Ain't y'all something! Can't hardly call y'all babies no more.' He turned. 'Mr. Morrison, what you think 'bout these children of mine !' In our excitement, we had taken no notice of the other man standing quietly at the side of the road. But now, gazing upward at the most formidable-looking being we had ever encountered, we huddled closer to Papa. The man was a human tree in height, towering high above Papa's six feet two inches. The long trunk of his massive body bulged with muscles, and his skin, of the deepest ebony, was partially scarred upon his face and neck, as if by fire. Deep lifelines were cut into his face and his hair was splotched with gray, but his eyes were clear and penetrating. I glanced at the boys and it was obvious to me that they were wondering the same thing as I: Where had such a being come from ! 'Children,' said Papa, ‘meet Mr. L.T. Morrison. Each of us whispered a faint hello to the giant, then the six of us started up the road toward home. Before we reached the house, Mama and Big Ma met us. When Papa saw Mama, his square, highcheekboned face opened to a wide smile and, lifting Mama with spirited gusto, he swung her around twice before setting her down and kissing her. 'David. is something the matter !' she asked. Papa laughed. 'Something gotta be wrong, woman, for me to come see 'bout you !' 'You got my letter?' He nodded, then hugged and kissed Big Ma before introducing them both to Mr. Morrison. When we reached the house we climbed the long, sloping lawn to the porch and went into Mama and Papa's room, which also served as the living area. Mama offered Mr. Morrison Grandpa Logan's chair, a cushioned oak rocker skillfully crafted by Grandpa himself; but Mr. Morrison did not sit down immediately. Instead, he stood gazing at the room. It was a warm, comfortable room of doors and wood and pictures. From it a person could reach the front or the side porch, the kitchen, and the two other bedrooms. Its walls were made of smooth oak, and on them hung gigantic photographs of Grandpa and Big Ma. Papa and Uncle Hammer when they were boys, Papa's two eldest brothers, who were now dead, and pictures of Mama's family. The furniture, a mixture of Logan-crafted walnut and oak, included a walnut bed whose ornate headboard rose halfway up the wall toward the high ceiling, a grand chiffonier with a floor- length mirror, a large rolltop desk which had once been Grandpa's but now belonged to Mama, and the four oak chairs, two of them rockers, which Grandpa had made for Big Ma as a wedding present. Mr. Morrison nodded when he had t'aken it all in, as if he approved, then sat across from Papa in front of the unlit fireplace. The boys and I pulled up straight-backed chairs near Papa as Big Ma asked, ‘How long you gonna be home, son !' Papa looked across at her. Till Sunday evening,' he said quietly. 'Sunday!' Mama exclaimed. ‘Why, today's already Saturday, 'I know, baby,' Papa said, taking her hand, ‘but I gotta get that night train out of Vicksburg so I can get back to work by Monday morning. Christopher-John, Little Man, and I groaned loudly, and Papa turned to us. ‘Papa, can't you stay no longer than that! Last time you come home, you stayed a week,' I said. Papa gently pulled one of my pigtails. ‘Sorry, Cassie girl, but I stay any longer, I might lose my job. 'But, Papa – 'Listen, all of y'all,' he said, looking from me to the boys to Mama and Big Ma, 'I come home special so I could bring Mr. Morrison. He's gonna stay with us awhile.' If Mama and Big Ma were surprised by Papa's words. they did not show it, but the boys and I looked with wide eyes at each other, then at the giant. 'Mr. Morrison lost his job on the railroad a while back.' Papa continued. 'and he ain't been able to find anything else. When I asked him if he wanted to come work here as a hired hand, he said he would. I told him we couldn't afford much - food and shelter and a few dollars in cash when I come home in the winter.' Mama turned to Mr. Morrison, studied him for a moment, and said, 'Welcome to our home, Mr. Morrison.' 'Miz Logan.' said Mr. Morrison in a deep, quiet voice like the roll of low thunder. ‘I think you oughta know I got fired off my job. Got in a fight with some men ... beat'em up pretty bad.' Mama stared into Mr. Morrison's deep eyes.' Whose fault was it !' Mr. Morrison stared back. 'I'd say theirs. 'Did the other men get fired !' 'No. ma'am,' answered Mr. Morrison. 'They was white.' Mama nodded and stood. 'Thank you for telling me. Mr. Morrison. You're lucky no worse happened and we're glad to have you here .,.especially now.' Then she turned and went into the kitchen with Big Ma to prepare supper, leaving the boys and me to wonder about her last words. 'Stacey, what you think!' I asked as we milked the cows in the evening. ‘How come Papa come home and brung Mr. Morrison!' Stacey shrugged. ‘Like he said, I guess.' I thought on that a moment, 'Papa ain't never brung nobody here before.' Stacey did not reply, 'You think .,,Stacey, you think it's cause of them burnings T.J. was talking 'bout !' 'Burnings!' piped Little Man, who had interrupted his feeding of the chickens to visit with Lady, our golden mare. 'What's burnings gotta do with anything!' 'That happened way over by Smellings Creek,' said Stacey slowly, ignoring Little Man. 'Papa got no need to think ... His voice trailed off and he stopped milking. 'Think what !' I asked. 'Nothin'.' he muttered, turning back to the cow.'Don't worry 'bout it.' I glared at him. 'I ain't worrying. I just wanna know, that's all, and I betcha anything Mr. Morrison come here to do more'n work. Sure wish I knew for sure. Stacey made no reply, but Christopher-John, his pudgy hands filled with dried corn for the chickens and his lower lip quivering, said,'I –I know what I wish. I wish P-Papa didn't never have to go 'way no more. I wish he could just stay ... and stay...' At church the next morning, Mrs.. Silas Lanier leaned across me and whispered to Big Ma, 'John Henry Berry died last night.' When the announcement was made to the congregation, the deacons prayed for the soul of John Henry Berry and the recovery of his brother, Beacon, and his uncle, Mr. Samuel Berry. But after church, when some of the members stopped by the house to visit, angry hopeless words were spoken. The way I hears it,' said Mr. Lanier, ‘they been after John Henry ever since he come back from the war and settled on his daddy's place up by Smellings Creek. Had a nice little place up there too, and was doing pretty well. Left a wife and six children.' Big Ma shook her head. ‘Just in the wrong place at the wrong time. The boys and I sat at our study table pretending not to listen, but listening still. 'Henrietta Toggins,' said Mrs. Lanier, 'you know, Clara Davis's sister that live up there in Strawberry! Well, she's kin to the Berrys and she was with John Henry and Beacon when the trouble got started. They was gonna drop her off at home - you know John Henry had him one of them old Model-T pickups - but they needed some gas so they stopped by that fillin' station up there in Strawberry. They was waitin' there for they gas when some white men come up messin' with them - been drinkin', you know. And Henrietta heard 'em say, "That's the nigger Sallie Ann said was flirtin with her." And when she heard that, she said to John Henry, "Let's get on outa here." He wanted to wait for the gas, but she made him and Beacon get in that car, and them men jus' watched them drive off and didn't mess with 'em right then. 'John Henry, he took her on home then headed back for his own place, but evidently them men caught up with him and Beacon again and starts rammin' the back of they car - least that's what Beacon and John Henry told they aunt and uncle when they seed 'em. John Henry knowed he was runnin' outa gas and he was 'fraid he couldn't make it to his own place, so he stopped at his uncle's, But them men dragged him and Beacon both outa that house, and when old man Berry tried to stop it, they lit him afire with them boys.' 'It's she' a shame, all right,' said T.J.'s father, a frail, sickly man with a hacking cough. 'These folks gettin' so bad in here. Heard tell they lynched a boy a few days ago at Crosston.' 'And ain't a thing gonna be done 'bout it,' said Mr. Lanier. That's what's so terrible ! When Henrietta went to the sheriff and told him what she'd seed, he called her a liar and sent her on home. Now I hear tells that some of them men that done it been 'round braggin' 'bout it, Sayin' they'd do it again if some uppity nigger get out of line.' Mrs. Avery asked, 'Lord have mercy I' Papa sat very quietly while the Laniers and the Averys talked, studying them with serious eyes. Finally, he took the pipe from his mouth and made a statement that seemed to the boys and me to be totally disconnected with the conversation. 'In this family, we don't shop at the Wallace store.' The room became silent. The boys and I stared at the adults wondering why, The Laniers and the Averys looked uneasily about them and when the silence was broken, the subject had changed to the sermon of the day, After the Laniers and the Averys had left. Papa called us to him. 'Your mama tells me that a lot of the older children been going up to that Wallace store after school to dance and buy their bootleg liquor and smoke cigarettes. Now she said she's already told y'all this, but I'm gonna tell y'all again, so listen good. We don't want y'all going to that place. Children going there are gonna get themselves in a whole lot of trouble one day. There's drinking up there and I don't like it - and I don't like them Wallaces either. If I ever find out y'all been up there, for any reason, I'm gonna wear y'all out. Y'all hear me !' 'Yessir, Papa.' piped Christopher-John readily. 'I ain't never going up there. The rest of us agreed: Papa always meant what he said - and he swung a mean switch. Three By the end of October the rain had come, falling heavily upon the six-inch layer of dust which had had its own way for more than two months. At first the rain had merely splotched the dust, which seemed to be rejoicing in its own resiliency and laughing at the heavy drops thudding against it: but eventually the dust was forced to surrender to the mastery of the rain and it churned into a fine red mud that oozed between our toes and slopped against our ankles as we marched miserably to and from school. To shield us from the rain, Mama issued us dried calf- skins which we flung over our heads and shoulders like stiff cloaks. We were not very fond of the skins, for once they were wet they emitted a musty odor which seeped into our clothing and clung to our skins. We preferred to do with- out them; unfortunately, Mama cared very little about what we preferred. Since we usually left for school after Mama, we solved this problem by dutifully cloaking ourselves with the skins before leaving home. As soon as we were beyond Big Ma's eagle eyes, we threw off the cloaks and depended upon the overhanging limbs of the forest trees to keep us dry. Once at school, we donned the cloaks again and marched into our respective classrooms properly attired. If we had been faced only with the prospect of the rain soaking through our clothing each morning and evening, we could have more easily endured the journey between home and school. But as it was, we also had to worry about the Jefferson Davis school bus zooming frolic behind and splashing us with the murky waters of the road. Knowing that the bus driver liked to entertain his passengers by sending us slipping along the road to the almost inaccessible forest banks washed to a smooth baldness by the constant rains, we continuously looked over our shoulders when we were between the two crossroads so that we could reach the bank before the bus was upon us. But sometimes the rain pounded so heavily that it was all we could do to stay upright, and we did not look back as often nor listen as carefully as we should; we consequently found ourselves comical objects to cruel eyes that gave no thought to our misery. No one was more angered by this humiliation than Little Man. Although he had asked Mama after the first day of school why Jefferson Davis had two buses and Great Faith had none, he had never been totally satisfied by her answer. She had explained to him, as she had explained to Christopher-John the year before and to me two years before that, that the county did not provide buses for its black students. In fact, she said, the county provided very little and much of the money which supported the black schools came from the black churches. Great Faith Church just could not afford a bus, so therefore we had to walk. This information cut deeply into Little Man's brain, and each day when he found his clean clothes splashed red by the school bus, he became more and more embittered until finally one day he stomped angrily into the kitchen and exploded. ‘They done it again, Big Ma! Just look at my clothes!' Big Ma clucked her tongue as she surveyed us.' Well, go on and get out of'em, honey, and wash 'em out. All of y'all, get out of them clothes and dry yo'selves.' she said, turning back to the huge iron-bellied stove to stir her stew. 'But, Big Ma, it ain't fair!' wailed Little Man. 'It just ain't fair. Stacey and Christopher-John left to change into their work clothes, but Little Man sat on the side bench looking totally dejected as he gazed at his pale-blue pants crusted with mud from the knees down. Although each night Big Ma prepared a pot of hot soapy water for him to wash out his clothing, each day he arrived home looking as if his pants had not been washed in more than a month. Big Ma was not one for coddling any of us, but now she turned from the stove and, wiping her hands on her long white apron, sat down on the bench and put her arm around Little Man. 'Now, look here, baby, it ain't the end of the world. Lord. child. don't you know one day the sun'll shine again and you won't get muddy no more !' 'But. Big Ma.' Little Man protested. 'ifn that ole bus driver would slow down, I wouldn't get muddy!' Then he frowned deeply and added, 'Or ifn we had a bus like theirs.' 'Well. he don't and you don't,' Big Ma said, getting up. 'So ain't no use frettin' 'bout it. One day you'll have a plenty of clothes and maybe even a car of yo' own to ride 'round in, so don't you pay no mind to them ignorant white folks. You jus' keep on studyin' and get yo'self a good education and you'll be all right. Now. go on and wash out yo' clothes and hang 'em by the fire so's I can iron 'em 'fore I go to bed.' Turning. she spied me. 'Cassie, what you want, girl! Go change into yo' pants and hurry on back here so's you can help me get this supper on the table time yo' mama get hom'e. That night when I was snug in the deep feathery bed beside Big Ma, the tat-tat of the rain against the tin roof changed to a deafening roar that sounded as if thousands of giant rocks were being hurled against the earth. By morning the heavy rain had become a drizzle, but the earth was badly sodden from the night's downpour. High rivers of muddy water flowed in the deep gullies, and wide lakes shimmered on the roads. As we set out for school the whiteness of the sun at- tempted to penetrate the storm clouds, but by the time we had turned north toward the second crossing it had given up, slinking meekly behind the blackening clouds. Soon the thunder rolled across the sky, and the rain fell like hail upon our bent heads. 'Ah, shoot! I sure am gettin' tired of this mess,' complained T.J. But no one else said a word. We were listening for the bus. Although we had left home earlier than usual to cover the northern road before the bus came, we were not overly confident that we would miss it, for we had tried this strategy before. Sometimes it worked; most times it didn't, It was as if the bus were a living thing, plaguing and defeating us at every turn. We could not outwit it. We plodded along feeling the cold mud against our feet, walking faster and faster to reach the crossroads. Then ChristopherJohn stopped. 'Hey, y'all, I think I hear it,' he warned. We looked around, but saw nothing. 'Ain't nothin' yet,' I said. We walked on. 'Wait a minute,' said Christopher-John, stopping a second time. ‘There it is again.' We turned but still there was nothing. 'Why don't you clean out your ears!' T.J. exclaimed. 'Wait,' said Stacey, 'I think I hear it too.' We hastened up the road to where the gully was narrower and we could easily swing up the bank into the forest. Soon the purr of a motor came closer and Mr. Granger's sleek silver Packard eased into view. It was a grand car with chrome shining even in the rain, and the only one like it in the county, so it was said. We groaned. 'Jus' ole Harlan,' said T,J. flippantly as the expensive car rounded a curve and disappeared, then he and Claude started down the bank. Stacey stopped them. ‘Long as we're already up here, why don't we wait awhile.' he suggested. ‘The bus oughta be here soon and it'll be harder to get up on the bank further down the road. 'Ah, man, that bus ain't comin' for a while yet,' said T.J. 'We left early this mornin', remember !' Stacey looked to the south, thinking. Little Man, Christopher-John and I waited for his decision. 'Come on, man.' T.J. persuaded. ‘Why stay up here waitin' for that devilish bus when we could be at school outa this mess !' T.J. and Claude jumped from the bank. Then Stacey, frowning as if he were doing this against his better judgment, jumped down too. Little Man, Christopher-John, and I followed, Five minutes later we were skidding like frightened puppies toward the bank again as the bus accelerated and barreled down the narrow rain-soaked road; but there was no place to which we could run. for Stacey had been right. Here the gullies were too wide, filled almost to overflowing, and there were no briars or bushes by which we could swing up onto the bank. Finally, when the bus was less than fifty feet behind us, it veered dangerously close to the right edge of the road where we were running, forcing us to attempt the jump to the bank; but all of us fell short and landed in the slime of the gully. Little Man, chest-deep in water, scooped up a handful of mud and in an uncontrollable rage scrambled up to the road and ran after the retreating bus. As moronic rolls of laughter and cries of 'Nigger! Nigger ! Mud eater !' wafted from the open windows, Little Man threw his mudball, missing the wheels by several feet. Then, totally dismayed by what had happened. he buried his face in his hands and cried. T.J. climbed from the gully grinning at Little Man, but Stacey, his face burning red beneath his dark skin, glared so fiercely at T.J. that he fell back. 'Just one word outa you, T.J.,' he said tightly. 'Just one word. Christopher-John and I looked at each other. We had never seen Stacey look like this. and neither had T.J. 'Hey, man, I ain't said nothin' ! I'm jus' as burnt as you are. Stacey glowered at T.J. a moment longer, then walked swiftly to Little Man and put his long arm around his shoulders, saying softly, 'Come on, Man. It ain't gonna happen no more, least not for a long while. I promise you that.' Again, Christopher-John and I looked questioningly at each other, wondering how Stacey could make such a rash promise. Then, shrugging, we hurried after him, When Jeremy Simms spied us from his high perch on the forest path, he ran hastily down and joined us. 'Hey,' he said, his face lighting into a friendly grin, But no one spoke to him. The smile faded and, noticing our mud-covered clothing, he asked, 'Hey, St-Stacey, wh-what happened!' Stacey turned, stared into his blue eyes and said coldly, 'Why don't you leave us alone! How come you-always hanging ‘round us anyway I' Jeremy grew even more pale. 'C-cause I just likes y'all,' he stammered. Then he whispered. 'W-was it the bus again!' No one answered him and he said no more. When we reached the crossroads, he looked hopefully at us as if we might relent and say good-bye. But we did not relent and as I glanced back at him standing alone in the middle of the crossing, he looked as if the world itself was slung around his neck. It was only then that I realized that Jeremy never rode the bus, no matter how bad the weather. As we crossed the school lawn, Stacey beckoned Christopher-John. Little Man, and me aside. 'Look,' he whispered, 'meet me at the tool shed right at noon.' 'Why!' we asked. He eyed us conspiratorially. 'I’ll show y'all how we're gonna stop that bus from splashing us.' 'How !' asked Little Man, eager for revenge. 'Don't have time to explain now. Just meet me. And be on time. It's gonna take us all lunch hour. 'Y-you mean we ain't gonna eat no lunch !' Christopher- John cried in dismay. 'You can miss lunch for one day,' said Stacey, moving away. But Christopher-john looked sourly after him as if he greatly questioned the wisdom of a plan so drastic that it could exclude lunch. 'You gonna tell T.J. and Claude!' I asked. Stacey shook his head. 'T.J.'s my best friend. but he's got no stomach for this kinda thing. He talks too much, and we couldn't include Claude without T.J,' 'Good,' said Little Man. At noon, we met as planned and ducked into the unlocked tool shed where all the church and school garden tools were kept. Stacey studied the tools available while the rest of us watched. Then, grabbing the only shovels, he handed one to me, holding on to the other himself, and directed Little Man and Christopher-John to each take two buckets. Stealthily emerging from the tool shed into the drizzle, we eased along the forest edge behind the class buildings to avoid being seen. Once on the road, Stacey began to run. 'Come on. hurry,' he ordered. 'We ain't got much time.' 'Where we going!' asked Christopher-John, still not quite adjusted to the prospect of missing lunch. 'Up to where that bus forced us off the road. Be careful now,' he said to Christopher-John, already puffing to keep up. When we reached the place where we had fallen into the gully, Stacey halted. ‘All right,' he said, ‘start digging. Without another word, he put his bare foot upon the top edge of the shovel and sank it deep into the soft road. 'Come on, come on,' he ordered, glancing up at Christopher- John, Little Man and me, who were wondering whether he had finally gone mad. 'Cassie, you start digging over there on that side of the road right across from me. That's right, don't get to~· near the edge. It's gotta look like it's been washed out. Christopher-John, you and Little Man start scooping out mud from the middle of the road. Quick now,' he said, still digging as we began to carry out his commands. ‘We only got 'bout thirty minutes so's we can get back to school on time.' We asked no more questions. While Stacey and I shoveled ragged holes almost a yard wide and a foot deep toward each other, dumping the excess mud into the water-filled gullies, Little Man and Christopher-John scooped bucketfuls of the red earth from the road's center. And for once in his life, Little Man was happily oblivious to the mud spattering upon him. When Stacey's and my holes merged into one big hole with Little Man's and Christopher-John's. Stacey and I threw down our shovels and grabbed the extra buckets. Then the four of us ran back and forth to the gullies, hastily filling the buckets with the murky water and dumping it into the hole, Now understanding Stacey's plan. we worked wordlessly until the water lay at the same level as the road. Then Stacey waded into the gully water and pulled himself up onto the forest bank. Finding three rocks, he stacked them to identify the spot. 'It might look different this after-noon.' he explained, jumping down again. Christopher-John looked up at the sky. 'looks like it's gonna rain real hard some more.' 'Let's hope so,' said Stacey. 'The more rain, the better. That'll make it seem more likely that the road could've been washed away like that. It'll also keep cars and wagons away.' He looked around, surveying the road.'And let's hope don't nothin' come along 'fore that bus. Let's go. Quickly we gathered our buckets and shovels and hurried back to school. After returning the tools to the tool shed, we stopped at the well to wash the mud from our arms and feet, then rushed into our classes, hoping that the mud caked on our clothes would go unnoticed. As I slipped into my seat Miss Crocker looked at me oddly and shook her head. but when she did the same thing as Mary Lou and Alma sat down, I decided that my mud was no more noticeable than anyone else's. Soon after I had settled down to the boredom of Miss Crocker, the rain began to pound down again, hammering with great intensity upon the tin roof. After school it was still raining as the boys and I, avoiding T.J. and Claude, rushed along the slippery road recklessly bypassing more cautious students. 'You think we'll get there in time to see, Stacey!' I asked. 'We should. They stay in school fifteen minutes longer than we do and it always takes them a few minutes to load up.' When we reached the crossing, we glanced toward Jefferson Davis. The buses were there but the students had not been dismissed. We hastened on. Expecting to see the yard-wide ditch we had dug at noon, we were not prepared for the twelve-foot lake which glimmered up at us. 'Holy smokes ! What happened!' I exclaimed. 'The rain,' said Stacey. ‘Quick, up on the bank.' Eagerly, we settled onto the muddy forest floor and waited. 'Hey, Stacey.' I said, ‘won’t that big a puddle make that ole driver cautious!' Stacey frowned, then said uncertainly, ‘I don't know. Hope not. There's big puddles down the road that ain't deep. just water heavy. 'If I was to be walking out there when the bus comes, that ole bus driver would be sure to speed up so's he could splash me,' I suggested. 'Or maybe me,' Little Man volunteered, ready to do anything for his revenge. Stacey thought a moment, but decided against it. 'Naw. It's better none of us be on the road when it happens. It might give 'em ideas.' 'Stacey, what if they find out we done it!' asked Christopher-John nervously. 'Don't worry, they won't,' assured Stacey. 'Hey, I think it's coming,' whispered Little Man. We flattened ourselves completely and peered through the low bushes, The bus rattled up the road, though not as quickly as we had hoped. It rolled cautiously through a wide puddle some twenty feet ahead; then, seeming to grow bolder as it approached our man-made lake, it speeded up, spraying the water in high sheets of backward waterfalls into the forest. We could hear the students squealing with delight. But instead of the graceful glide through the puddle that its occupants were expecting, the bus emitted a tremendous crack and careened drunkenly into our trap. For a moment it swayed and we held our breath, afraid that it would topple over. Then it sputtered a last murmuring protest and died, its left front wheel in our ditch, its right wheel in the gully, like a lopsided billy goat on its knees. We covered our mouths and shook with silent laughter. As the dismayed driver opened the rear emergency exit, the rain poured down upon him in sharp-needled darts. He stood in the doorway looking down with disbelief at his sunken charge; then, holding on to the bus, he poked one foot into the water until it was on solid ground before gingerly stepping down. He looked under the bus. He looked at the steaming hood. He looked at the water. Then he scratched his head and cursed. 'How bad is it, Mr. Grimes?' a large, freckle-faced boy asked, pushing up one of the cracked windows and sticking out his head. 'Can we push it out and fix it !' 'Push it out! Fix it!' the bus driver echoed angrily. 'I got me a broken axle here an' a water-logged engine no doubt and no tellin' what-all else and you talkin' 'bout fixin' it! Y'all come on, get outa there! Y'all gonna have to walk home.' 'Mister Grimes,' a girl ventured, stepping hesitantly from the rear of the bus, 'you gonna be able to pick us up in the mornin' !' The bus driver stared at her in total disbelief. 'Girl, all y'all gonna be walkin' for at least two weeks by the time we get this thing hauled outa here and up to Strawberry to get fixed. Now y'all get on home.' He kicked a back tire, and added, 'And get y'all's daddies to come on up here and give me a hand with this thing. The students turned dismally from the bus. They didn't know how wide the hole actually was. Some of them took a wild guess and tried to jump it; but most of them miscalculated and fell in, to our everlasting delight. Others attempted to hop over the gullies to the forest to bypass the hole; however, we knew from much experience that they would not make it. By the time most of the students managed to get to the other side of the ditch, their clothes were dripping with the weight of the muddy water. No longer laughing, they moved spiritlessly toward their homes while a disgruntled Mr. Grimes leaned moodily against the raised rear end of the bus. Oh, how sweet was well-maneuvered revenge ! With that thought in mind, we quietly eased away and picked our way through the dense forest toward home. At supper Mama told Big Ma of the Jefferson Davis bus being stuck in the ditch. 'It's funny, you know, such a wide ditch in one day. I didn't even notice the beginning of it this morning - did you, children !' 'No'm.' we chorused. 'You didn't fall in, did you !' 'We jumped onto the bank when we thought the bus would be coming,' said Stacey truthfully. 'Well, good for you,' approved Mama. 'If that bus hadn't been there when I came along, I'd probably have fallen in myself. The boys and I looked at each other. We hadn't thought about that. 'How'd you get across, Mama !' Stacey asked. 'Somebody decided to put a board across the washout.' They gonna haul that bus outa there tonight!' Big Ma inquired. 'No, ma'am,' said Mama. 'I heard Mr. Granger telling Ted Grimes - the bus driver - that they won't be able to get it out until the rain stops and it dries up a bit. It's just too muddy now. We put our hands to our mouths to hide happy grins. I even made a secret wish that it would rain until Christmas. Mama smiled. ‘You know I'm glad no one was hurt - could've been too with such a deep ditch - but I'm also rather glad it happened.' 'Mary !' Big Ma exclaimed. 'Well, I am.' Mama said defiantly, smiling smugly to her- self and looking very much like a young girl. 'I really am.' Big Ma began to grin. 'You know somethin' ? I am too.' Then all of us began to laugh and were deliciously happy. Later that evening the boys and I sat at the study table in Mama and Papa's room attempting to concentrate on our lessons; but none of us could succeed for more than a few minutes without letting out a triumphant giggle. More than once Mama scolded us, telling us to get down to business. Each time she did, we set our fates into looks: of great seriousness, resolved that we would be adult about the matter and not gloat in our hour of victory. Yet just one glance at each other and we were lost, slumping on the table in helpless, contagious laughter. 'All right,' Mama said finally, 'I don't know what's going on here, but I suppose I'd better do something about it or you'll never get any work done.' It occurred to us that Mama might be preparing to whip us and we shot each other warning glances. But even that thought couldn't dampen our laughter, now uncontrollable, welling up from the pits of our stomachs and forcing streams of laughter tears down our faces. Stacey, holding his sides, turned to the wall in an attempt to bring himself under control. Little Man put his head under the table. But Christopher-John and I just doubled up and fell upon the floor. Mama took my arm and pulled me up. 'Over here, Cassie,' she said, directing me to a chair next to the fireplace and behind Big Ma, who was ironing our clothes for the next day. I peeped around Big Ma's long skirts and saw Mama guiding Stacey to her own desk. Then back she went for Little Man and, picking him up bodily, set him in the chair beside her rocker. Christopher-John she left alone at the study table. Then she gathered all our study materials and brought them to us along with a look that said she would tolerate no more of this foolishness. With Big Ma before me, I could see nothing else and I grew serious enough to complete my arithmetic assignment. When that was finished, I lingered before opening my reader, watching Big Ma as she hung up my ironed dress, then placed her heavy iron on a small pile of embers burning in a corner of the fireplace and picked up a second iron already warming there. She tested the iron with a tap of her finger and put it back again. While Big Ma waited for the iron to get hot. I could see Mama bending over outspread newspapers scraping the dried mud off the old field shoes of Papa's which she wore daily, stuffed with wads of newspaper, over her own shoes to protect them from the mud and rain. Little Man beside her was deep into his first-grade reader, his eyebrows furrowed in concentration. Ever since Mama had brought the reader home with the offensive inside cover no longer visible, Little Man had accepted the book as a necessary tool for passing the first grade. But he took no pride in it. Looking up. he noticed that Big Ma was now preparing to iron his clothes, and he smiled happily, Then his eyes met mine and silent laughter creased his face. I muffled a giggle and Mama looked up. 'Cassie, you start up again and I'm sending you to the kitchen to study.' she warned. 'Yes'm,' I said, settling back in my chair and beginning to read. I certainly did not want to go to the kitchen. Now that the fire no longer burned in the stove, it was cold in there. The room grew quiet again, except for the earthy humming of Big Ma's rich alto voice, the crackle of the hickory fire, and the patter of rain on the roof. Engrossed in a mystery, I was startled when the comfortable sounds were shattered by three rapid knocks on the side door. Rising quickly, Mama went to the door and called, ‘Who is it!' 'It's me, ma'am,' came a man's gravelly voice. ‘Joe Avery. Mama opened the door and Mr. Avery stepped dripping into the room. 'Why, Brother Avery.' Mama said. ‘what are you doing out on a night like this ? Come on in. Take off your coat and sit by the fire. Stacey, get Mr. Avery a chair. 'No'm,' said Mr. Avery, looking rather nervously over his shoulder into the night. 'I ain't got but a minute.' He stepped far enough into the room so that he could close the door, then nodded to the rest of us. 'Evenin', Miz Caroline, how you t'night!' 'Oh, I’ll do, I reckon,' said Big Ma, still ironing. 'How's Miz Fannie!' 'She's fine,' he said without dwelling on his wife.'Miz Logan ... uh, I come to tell you somethin'... somethin' important - Mr. Morrison here!' Mama stiffened. 'David. You heard something about David !' 'Oh, no'm,' replied Mr. Avery hastily. 'Ain't heard nothin 'bout yo' husband, ma'am. Mama regarded him quizzically. 'It's ..,it's them again. They's ridin' t'night.' Mama, her face pale and frightened, glanced back at Big Ma; Big Ma held her iron in midair. 'Uh ... children,' Mama said ,'I think it's your bedtime.' 'But, Mama -' we chorused in protest, wanting to stay and hear who was riding. 'Hush.' Mama said sternly. 'I said it was time to go to bed. Now go!' Groaning loudly enough to voice our displeasure, but not loudly enough to arouse Mama's anger, we stacked our books upon the study table and started toward the boys room. 'Cassie, I said go to bed. That's not your room.' 'But, Mama, it's cold in there,' I pouted. Usually, we were allowed to build small fires in the other rooms an hour before bedtime to warm them up. 'You'll be warm once you're under the covers. Stacey, take the flashlight with you and light the lantern in your room. Cassie, take the lamp from the desk with you." I went back and got the kerosene lamp, then entered my bedroom, leaving the door slightly ajar. 'Close that door, Cassie !' Immediately, the door was closed. I put the lamp on the dresser, then silently slid the latch off the outside door and slipped onto the wet front porch. I crossed to the boys' room. Tapping lightly, I whispered, 'Hey, let me in.' The door creaked open and I darted in. The room was bathed in darkness. 'What they say !' I asked. 'Shhhhh !' came the answer. I crept to the door leading into Mama's room and huddled beside the boys. The rain softened upon the roof and we could hear Mama asking, ‘But why? Why are they riding! What's happened?' 'I don't rightly know,' said Mr. Avery.'But y'all knows how they is. Anytime they thinks we steppin' outa our place, they feels like they gotta stop us. You know what some of'em done to the Berrys.' He paused, then went on bitterly, 'It don't take but a little of nothin' to set them devilish night men off.' 'But somethin' musta happened,' Big Ma said,'How you know 'bout it!' 'All's I can tell ya, Miz Caroline, is what Fannie heard when she was leavin' the Grangers' this evenin'. She'd just finished cleanin' up the supper dishes when Mr. Granger come home with Mr. Grimes - ya know, that white school's bus driver - and two other mens... A clap of deafening thunder drowned Mr. Avery's words, then the rain quickened and the conversation was lost. I grabbed Stacey's arm. ‘Stacey, they're coming after us!' 'What !' squeaked Christopher-John. 'Hush,' Stacey said harshly. 'And Cassie, let go. That hurts. 'Stacey, somebody musta seen and told on us,' I persisted. 'No ...' Stacey replied unconvincingly. 'It couldn't be.' 'Couldn't be?' cried Christopher-John in a panic. 'Whaddaya mean it couldn't be!' 'Stacey,' said Little Man excitedly, 'whaddaya think they gonna do to us ! Burn us up?' 'Nothin' !' Stacey exclaimed, standing up suddenly. ‘Now why don't y'all go to bed like y'all s'pose to!' We were stunned by his attitude. He sounded like Mama and I told him so. He collapsed in silence by the door, breathing hard, and although I could not see him, I knew that his face was drawn and that his eyes had taken on a haggard look. I touched his arm lightly. 'Ain't no call to go blaming your- self,' I said. 'We all done it.' 'But I got us into it,' he said listlessly. 'But we all wanted to do it,' I comforted. 'Not me!' denied Christopher-John. 'All I wanted to do was eat my lunch I' 'Shhhhh,' hissed Little Man.'I can hear 'em again.' 'I'd better go tell Mr. Morrison,' Mr. Avery was saying. 'He out back!' 'I'll tell him,' said Mama. We could hear the side door open and we scrambled up. 'Cassie, get back to your room quick,' Stacey whispered. They'll probably come check on us now. 'But what'll we do!' 'Nothin' now, Cassie. Them men probably won't even come near here.' 'Ya really believe that!' asked Christopher-John hopefully. 'But shouldn't we tell Mama ?' I asked. 'No! We can't ever tell nobody!' declared Stacey adamantly. 'Now go on, hurry !' Footsteps neared the door. I dashed onto the porch and hastened back to my own room, where I jumped under the bedcovers with my clothes still on. Shivering, I pulled the heavy patchwork quilts up to my chin. A few moments later Big Ma came in, leaving the door to Mama's room open. Knowing that she would be suspicious of such an early surrender to sleep, I sighed softly and, making sleepy little sounds, turned onto my stomach, careful not to expose my shirt sleeves. Obviously satisfied by my performance, Big Ma tucked the covers more closely around me and smoothed my hair gently. Then she stooped and started fishing for something under our bed. I opened my eyes. Now what the devil was she looking for down there! While she was searching, I heard Mama approaching and I closed my eyes again. 'Mama!' 'Stacey, what're you doing up?' 'Let me help.' 'Help with what !' 'With ... with whatever's the matter. Mama was silent a moment, then said softly, Thank you, Stacey, but Big Ma and I can handle it.' 'But Papa told me to help you !' 'And you do, more than you know. But right now you could help me most by going back to bed. It's a school day tomorrow, remember?’ 'But, Mama - 'If I need you, I'll call you. I promise.' I heard Stacey walk slowly away, then Mama whispering in the doorway, 'Cassie asleep!' 'Yeah, honey,' Big Ma said. 'Go on and sit back down. I'll be out in a minute.' Then Big Ma stood up and turned down the wick of the kerosene lamp. As she left the room, my eyes popped open again and I saw her outlined in the doorway, a rifle in her hands. Then she closed the door and I was left to the darkness. For long minutes I waited, wide awake, wondering what my next move should be. Finally deciding that I should again consult with the boys, I swung my legs over the edge of the bed, but immediately had to swing them back again as Big Ma re-entered the room. She passed the bed and pulled a straight-backed chair up to the window. Parting the curtains so that the blackness of the night mixed with the blackness of the room, she sat down without a sound. I heard the door to the boys' room open and close and I knew that Mama had gone in. I waited for the sound of the door opening again, but it did not come. Soon the chill of the cotton sheets beneath me began to fade and as Big Ma's presence lulled me into a security I did not really feel, I fell asleep. When I awoke, it was still nightly dark. ‘Big Ma!' I called. ‘Big Ma, you there!' But there was no reply from the chair by the window. Thinking that Big Ma had fallen asleep, I climbed from the bed and felt my way to her chair. She wasn't there. Outside, an owl hooted into the night, quiet now except for the drip-drap of water falling from the roof. I stood transfixed by the chair, afraid to move. Then I heard a noise on the porch. I could not control my trembling. Again the noise, this time close to the door, and it occurred to me that it was probably the boys coming to confer with me. No doubt Mama had left them alone too. Laughing silently at myself, I hurried onto the porch. 'Stacey,' I whispered. 'Christopher-John?' There was a sudden movement near the end of the porch and I headed to- ward it, feeling along the wall of the house. ‘Little Man! Hey, y'all, stop fooling 'round and answer me.' I crept precariously near the edge of the high porch, my eyes attempting to penetrate the blackness of the night. From below, a scratchy bristlyness sprang upon me, and I lost my balance and tumbled with a thud into the muddy flower bed. I lay paralyzed with fear. Then a long wet tongue licked my face. 'Jason ? Jason, that you!' Our hound dog whined his reply. I hugged him, then instantly let him go. ‘Was that you all the time! Look what you gone and done,' I fussed, thinking of the mess I was in with mud all over me. Jason whined again and I got up. I started to climb back up onto the porch but froze as a caravan of headlights appeared suddenly in the east, coming fast along the rain-soaked road like cat eyes in the night. Jason whined loudly, growing skittish as the lights approached, and when they slowed and braked before the house he slunk beneath the porch. I wanted to follow, but I couldn't. My legs would not move. The lead car swung into the muddy driveway and a shadowy figure outlined by the headlights of the car behind him stepped out. The man walked slowly up the drive. I stopped breathing. The driver of the next car got out, waiting. The first man stopped and stared at the house for several long moments as if uncertain whether it was the correct destination. Then he shook his head, and without a word returned to his car. With a wave of his hand he sent the other driver back in- side, and in less than a minute the lead car had backed into the road, its headlights facing the other cars. Each of the cars used the driveway to turn around, then the caravan sped away as swiftly as it had come, its seven pairs of rear lights glowing like distant red embers until they were swallowed from view by the Granger forest. Jason began barking now that the danger had passed, but he did not come out. As I reached for the porch to steady myself, there was a sense of quiet movement in the dark- ness. The moon slid from its dark covers, cloaking the earth in a shadowy white light, and I could see Mr. Morrison clearly, moving silently, like a jungle cat, from the side of the house to the road, a shotgun in his hand. Feeling sick, I crawled onto the porch and crept trembling toward the door. Once inside the house, I leaned against the latch while waves of sick terror swept over me. Realizing that I must get into bed before Mama or Big Ma came from the other room. I pulled off my muddy clothes, turning them inside out to wipe the mud from my body, and put on my night clothes. Then I climbed into the softness of the bed. I lay very still for a while, not allowing myself to think. But soon, against my will, the vision of ghostly headlights soaked into my mind and an uncontrollable trembling racked my body. And it remained until the dawn, when I fell into a restless sleep. Four 'Cassie, what's the matter with you, girl!' Big Ma asked as she thrust three sticks of dried pine into the stove to rekindle the dying morning fire. 'You sure are takin' a sorrowful long time to churn that butter. 'Nothin',' I muttered. 'Nothin' !' Big Ma turned and looked directly at me. ‘You been mopin' 'round here for the past week like you got the whoopin' cough, flu, and measles all put together. I sighed deeply and continued to churn. Big Ma reached out and felt my forehead, then my cheeks. Frowning, she pulled her hand away as Mama entered the kitchen. 'Mary, feel this child's face,' she said. ‘She seem warm to you !' Mama cupped my face in her thin hands. 'You feel sick, Cassie!' 'No'm.’ 'How do you feel?' 'All right,' I said, still churning. Mama studied me with the same disturbed look Big Ma wore and a tiny frown line appeared on her brow. 'Cassie, she said softly, fixing her dark eyes upon me, 'is there something you want to tell me!' I was on the verge of blurting out the awful truth about the bus and the men in the night, but then I remembered the pact Stacey had made us all swear to when I had told him, Christopher-John, and Little Man about the caravan and I said instead, 'No, ma'am,' and began to churn again. Abruptly, Mama took hold of the churning stick, her eyes searching mine. As she studied me, she seemed about to ask me something, then the question faded and she pulled away, lifting the lid of the churn .'It looks ready now,' she said with a sigh. 'Dip out the butter like I showed you and wash it down. I'll take care of the milk.' I scooped the butter from the churning lid onto a plate and went through the curtain to the small pantry off the kitchen to get the molding dish. It had been placed on a high shelf under several other dishes and I had to stand on a stool to get it. As I eased it out, Mama and Big Ma spoke softly in worried tones on the other side of the curtain. 'Somethin' the matter with that child, Mary. 'She's not sick, Mama.' 'There's all sorts of sickness. She ain't ate right for goin' on over a week. She ain't sleepin' right neither. Restless and murmurin' in her sleep all night long. And she won't hardly even go out and play, rather be in here helpin' us, Now you know that ain't like that child.' There was a moment's pause, then Mama whispered so I could hardly hear her. 'You think ... Mama, you think she could've seen - 'Oh, Lord, no, child,' Big Ma exclaimed hastily. 'I checked in there right after they passed and she was sound asleep. She couldn't've seen them old devils. The boys neither. Mama sighed. The boys, they're not themselves either. All of them, too quiet. Here it is Saturday morning and they're quiet as church mice. I don't like it, and I can't shake the feeling it's got something to do with – Cassie.' Without warning, I had lost my balance and with an absurd topple from the knee-high stool crashed upon the floor with the molding dish. 'Cassie, you hurt !' Mama asked, stooping beside me. 'No'm,' I mumbled, feeling very clumsy and close to tears. I knew that if I let the tears fall. Mama's suspicion that something was wrong would be confirmed for I never cried about such a silly thing as a fall; in fact, I seldom ever cried. So instead of crying, I jumped up quickly and began to pick up the broken pieces of the dish. 'I'm sorry, Mama,' I said. 'That's all right,' she said, helping me. When we had swept the chips away with the long field-straw broom, she told me, 'Leave the butter, Cassie, and go on in with the boys.' 'But, Mama…’ 'I'll do the butter. Now go on, do like I say. I stared up at Mama, wondering if she would ever know what we had done, then joined the boys who were sitting listlessly around the fire absently listening to T.J. 'See, fellows, there's a system to getting out of work,' T.J. was expounding as I sat down. 'Jus' don't be 'round when it's got to be done. Only thing is, you can't let your folks know that's what you're doin'. See, you should do like me. Like this mornin' when Mama wanted to bring back them scissors she borrowed from Miz Logan, I ups and volunteers so she don't have to make this long trip down here, she bein' so busy and all. And naturally when I got here, y'all wanted me to stay awhile and talk to y'all, so what could I do! I couldn't be impolite, could I! And by the time I finally convince y'all I gotta go, all the work'll be done at home.' T.J. chuckled with satisfaction. 'Yeah, you just have to use the old brain, that's all.' He was quiet a moment, expecting some comment on his discourse, but no one said a word. T.J.'s eyes roamed the length of the room, then he admonished, 'See, if you was smart like me, Stacey. you'd use the old brain to get the questions on that big test comin' up. Just think, they probably jus' sittin' right here in this very room waitin' to be discovered.' Stacey cast T.J. an annoyed look. but did not speak. 'Y'all sure are a sorry lot this mornin',' T.J. observed. 'A fellow's just wastin' his know-how talkin' to y'all.' 'Ain't nobody asked you to give it,' said Stacey. 'Well, you don't have to get snippety about it,' replied T.J. haughtily. Again. silence prevailed; but that would not do for T.J.'Say, how'bout we sneak down to that ole Wallace store and learn how to do them new dances!' 'Mama told us not to go down there,' Stacey said. 'You some mama's boy or somethin' you gotta do everything your mama tells - 'You go on if you wanna,' said Stacey quietly, not rising to T.J.'s bait, 'but we staying here.' Again, silence. 2Then T.J. said: 'Say, y'all hear the latest 'bout them night men!' Suddenly, all eyes turned from the fire and riveted themselves upon him. Our faces were eager question marks; we were totally in T.J.'s power. 'What 'bout them i' Stacey asked, almost evenly. T.J., of course, intended to nurse the moment for as long as he could. 'You see when a fellow's as smart as me, he gets to know things that other folks don't. Now, this kind of information ain't for the ears of little kids so I really shouldn't even tell y'all - 'Then don't!' said Stacey with smooth finality, turning back toward the fire as if he cared not at all about the night men. Taking his cue, I nudged Christopher-John and Christopher- John nudged Little Man, and the three of us forced ourselves to stare into the fire in feigned disinterest. Without a captive audience. T.J. had to reinterest us by getting to the point. 'Well, 'bout a week ago, they rode down to Mr. Sam Tatum's place - you know, down the Jackson Road toward Strawberry - and you know what they done !' Stacey, Little Man, and I kept our eyes upon the fire, but Christopher-John piped eagerly .'What?' I poked Christopher-John and he turned guiltily around, but T.J., triumphant with an assured audience of one, settled back in his chair ready to prolong the suspense. 'You know Mama'd kill me if she knowed I was tellin' this. I heard her and Miz Claire Thompson talkin' 'bout it. They was real scared. Don't know why though. Them ole night men sure wouldn't scare me none. Like I told Claude - 'Hey, y'all,' Stacey said, standing and motioning us up. 'Mama said she wanted us to take some milk and butter down to Miz Jackson before noon. We'd better get started.' I nodded, and Christopher-John, Little Man, and I got up. 'Tarred and feathered him!' T.J, announced hastily. 'Poured the blackest tar they could find all over him, then plastered him with chicken feathers.' T.J. laughed. 'Can you imagine that!' 'But why!' asked Little Man, forgetting our ploy. This time T.J. did not slow down. 'I dunno if y'all's little ears should hear this, but it seems ::e called Mr. Jim Lee Barnett a liar - he's the man who runs the Mercantile down in Strawberry. Mr. Tatum's s'pose to done told him that he ain't ordered up all them things Mr. Barnett done charged him for. Mr. Barnett said he had all them things Mr. Tatum ordered writ down and when Mr. Tatum asked to see that list of his, Mr. Barnett says, "You callin' me a liar, boy!" And Mr. Tatum says, "Yessuh, I guess I is !" That done it i' 'Then it wasn't 'cause of the bus!' Christopher-John blurted out. 'Bus ! What's a bus got to do with it !' 'Nothin',' said Stacey quickly. 'Nothin' at all.' 'Well, if anybody said them night men was down in here 'cause of some stupid bus, they crazy,' said T.J. authoritatively. "Cause my information come direct from Miz Claire Thompson who seen Mr. Tatum herself.' 'You sure!' Stacey asked. 'Sure! Sure, I'm sure. When do I ever say anythin' when I ain't sure?' Stacey smiled with relief. 'Come on, let's get the milk.' All of us went into the kitchen, then to the bedrooms to get our coats. When we got outside. T.J. remembered that he had left his cap by the fire and ran back to retrieve it. As soon as we were alone. Little Man asked. 'Stacey, you really think them night men put tar and feathers all over Mr. Tatum!' 'I s'pose so,' said Stacey. Little Man frowned, but it was Christopher-John who spoke, whispering shrilly as if a stray morning ghost might overhear .'lf they ever find out 'bout the bus, you think they gonna put tar and feathers all over us !' Little Man's frown deepened and he observed gravely, 'If they did, we'd never get clean again. 'Cassie,' said Christopher-John, his eyes wide, 'w-was you real s-scared when you seen 'em !' Little Man shivered with excitement. ‘I wish I could've Seen 'em. 'Well, I don't,' declared Christopher-John. 'In fact, I wish I'd never heard of no night men or buses or secrets or holes in the road!' And with that outburst, he stuffed his pudgy hands into his thin jacket, pressed his lips firmly together, and refused to say another word. After a few moments, Stacey said, ‘What’s keeping T.J. !' The rest of us shrugged. then followed Stacey back up the porch into Mama's room. As we entered, T.J. jumped. He was standing at the desk with Mama's W.E.B, Du Bois's The Negro in his hands. 'That don't look like your cap.' said Stacey, 'Aw, man, I ain't done nothin'. jus' lookin' at Miz Logan's history book, that's all. I'm mighty interested in that place called Egypt she been tellin' us'bout and them black kings that was rulin' back then.' Still talking, he casually put down the book and picked up his cap. All four of us looked accusingly at T.J. and he halted. 'Say, what is this ! What's the meanin' of sneakin' up on me like that anyway! Y'all think I was lookin' for them test questions or somethin' ! Shoot, a fellow'd think you didn't trust him.' Then, thrusting his arm around Stacey's shoulders, he chided,'Friends gotta trust each other, Stacey, 'cause ain't nothin' like a true friend.' And with those words of wisdom he left the room, leaving us to wonder how he had managed to slink out of this one. The Monday after his arrival Mr. Morrison had moved into the deserted tenant shack that stood in the south pasture. It was a sorry mess, that house, Its door hung sadly from a broken hinge; its porch floorboards were rotted; and its one- room interior was densely occupied by rats, spiders, and other field creatures. But Mr. Morrison was a quiet man, almost shy, and although Mama had offered him lodging in our house, he preferred the old shack. Mama sensed that Mr. Morrison was a private person and she did not object to the move, but she did send the boys and me to the house to help clean it. Little Man, Christopher-John, and I took to Mr. Morrison immediately and had no objections to the cleaning. Any- body who was a friend of Papa's was all right in our book; besides, when he was near, night men and burnings and midnight tarrings faded into a hazy distance. But Stacey remained aloof and had little to do with him. After the cleaning I asked Mama if Christopher-John, Little Man, and I could go visit Mr. Morrison, but she said no. 'But, Mama, I wanna know more 'bout him,' I explained. 'I just wanna know how come he's so big. 'You know about as much as you need to know.' she decided. 'And long as Mr. Morrison stays here, that's his house. If he wants you down there, he'll ask you. 'Don't know how come y'all wanna go down there no- way,' Stacey said moodily when Mama was out of hearing. "Cause we like him, that's why.' I answered, tired of his distant attitude toward Mr. Morrison. Then, as discreetly as I could, I said. 'What's the matter with you, boy, not liking Mr. Morrison!' Stacey shrugged. 'I like him all right.' 'Don't act that way.’ Stacey looked away from me. 'Don't need him here. All that work he doing, I could've done it myself. Ah, you couldn't've done no such thing. Besides - I looked around to be certain that Big Ma and Mama were not near - 'besides, Papa didn't just bring him here to do no work. You know how come he really here.' Stacey turned toward me haughtily. 'I could've taken care of that too.' I rolled my eyes at him, but held my peace. I didn't feel like a fight, and as long as Mr. Morrison was within hollering distance of the back porch, it made little difference to me what Stacey thought he could do. 'I sure wouldn't want that big ole man stayin' at my place.' said T.J. on the way to school. 'I betcha he get mad one time, he'd take ole Little Man and swing him over that tree yonder like he wasn't nothin' but a twig.' He laughed then as Little Man set his lips and stared angrily up. 'Course, I could probably 'bout do that myself. 'Couldn't neither !' denied Little Man. 'Hush, Man,' said Stacey.' T.J., leave Man alone.' 'Aw, I ain't botherin' him. Little Man's my buddy, ain't ya, Man ?' Little Man scowled, but didn't reply. T.J. turned back to Stacey. 'You ready for that history test?' 'Hope so,' said Stacey.'But I keep forgetting them dates.' 'Betcha I could help ya, if you be nice.' 'How? You worse than I am'bout dates.' T.J. grinned, then slyly pulled a folded sheet of paper from his pocket and handed it to Stacey. Stacey unfolded it, looked at it curiously, then frowned. 'You planning on cheating !' 'Well, naw, I ain't plannin' on it,' said T.J. seriously. 'Jus' if I gotta.' 'Well, you ain't gonna,' said Stacey, tearing the paper in two. 'Hey, what's the matter with you, man !' cried T.J. grabbing for the paper. But Stacey turned his back to him and tore the paper into bits, then deposited them in the gully. 'Man, that she' ain't right ! I wouldn't do you that way !' 'Maybe not.' replied Stacey, 'But at least this way you won't get into no trouble.' T.J. mumbled, 'If failin' ain't trouble, I don't know what Little Man, Christopher-John, Claude, and I were sitting on the bottom step of the seventh-gradeclass building after school waiting for Stacey and T.J. when the front door banged open and T.J. shot out and tore across the yard. 'What's the matter with him!' asked Christopher-John, 'Ain't he gonna wait for Stacey!' The rest of the seventh grade, led by Little Willie Wiggins and Moe Turner, spilled from the building. 'There he go!' cried Little Willie as T.J. disappeared on the forest road. Moe Turner yelled, 'Let's see where he goin' !' Then he and three other boys dashed away in pursuit of T.J. But the others stood restlessly near the steps as if school had not yet ended. 'Hey, what's going on?' I asked Little Willie, 'What's everybody waiting' round for?' 'And where's Stacey!' demanded Little Man. Little Willie smiled. 'Stacey inside with Miz Logan. He got whipped today. 'Whipped!' I cried. 'Why, can't nobody whip Stacey. Who done it!' Your mama,' laughed Little Willie. 'Mama !' Christopher-John, Little Man, and I exclaimed. Little Willie nodded. 'Yep. In front of everybody. I swallowed hard, feeling very sorry for my older brother. It was bad enough to be whipped in front of thirty others by a teacher, but to get it by one's own mother - now that was downright embarrassing. 'Why'd Mama do that !' asked Christopher-John. 'She caught him with cheat notes during the history examination.' 'Mama knows Stacey wouldn't cheat!' I declared. Little Willie shrugged. 'Well, whether she knowed it or not, she sho''nough whipped him... Course, now, she give him a chance to get out of it when he said he wasn't cheatin' and she asked him how he got them cheat notes. But Stacey wouldn't tell on ole T.J., and you know good and well ole T.J. wasn't 'bout to say them notes was his.' 'Cheat notes ! But how'd T.J. get cheat notes! Stacey got rid of them things this morning !' 'Come noontime though,' replied Little Willie,'T.J. was in them woods busy writing himself another set. Me and Moe seen him.' 'Well, what the devil was Stacey doing with 'em!' 'Well, we was in the middle of the examination and ole T.J. slips out these cheat notes - me and Clarence here was sittin' right behind him and T.J. and seen the whole thing. Stacey was sittin' right side of T.J. and when he seen them notes, he motioned T.J. to put 'em away. At first T.J. wouldn't do it, but then he seen Miz Logan startin' toward em and he slipped Stacey the notes. Well, Stacey didn't see Miz Logan comin' when he took them notes, and by the time he saw her it was too late to get rid of 'em. Wasn't nothin' Miz Logan could do but whip him. Failed him too.' 'And ole T.J. just sat there and ain't said a word,' interjected Clarence, laughing. 'But knowin' Stacey, I betcha ole T.J, ain't gonna get away with it,' chuckled Little Willie.'And T.J. know it too. That's why he lit outa here like he done, and I betcha - Hey, Stacey !' Everyone turned as Stacey bounded down the steps. His square face was unsmiling, but there was no anger in his voice when he asked quietly, 'Anybody seen T.J.!' All the students answered at once, indicating that T.J. had headed west toward home, then surrounded Stacey as he started across the lawn. Christopher-John, Little Man, Claude, and I followed. When we reached the crossroads, Moe Turner was waiting. T.J. went down to the Wallace store,' he announced. Stacey stopped and so did everyone else. Stacey stared past Jefferson Davis, then back down the road toward Great Faith. Looking over his shoulder, he found me and ordered, 'Cassie, you and Christopher-John and Man go on home.' 'You come too,' I said, afraid of where he was going. 2'Got something to take care of first,' he said, walking away. 'Mama gonna take care of you, too !' I hollered after him. "You know she said we wasn't to go down there, and she find out, she gonna wear you out again! Papa too!' But Stacey did not come back. For a moment, Little Man, Christopher-John, Claude, and I stood watching Stacey and the others heading swiftly northward. Then Little Man said, 'I wanna see what he gonna do.' 'I don't,' declared Christopher-John. 'Come on,' I said, starting after Stacey with Little Man and Claude beside me. 'I don't want no whipping!' objected Christopher-John. standing alone in the crossroads. But when he saw that we were not coming back, he puffed to join us, grumbling all the while. The Wallace store stood almost a half mile beyond Jefferson Davis, on a triangular lot that faced the Soldiers Bridge crossroads. Once the Granger plantation store, it had been run by the Wallaces for as long as I could remember, and most of the people within the forty-mile stretch between Smellings Creek and Strawberry shopped there. The other three corners of the crossroads were forest land, black and dense. The store consisted of a small building with a gas pump in front and a storage house in back. Beyond the store, against the forest edge, were two gray clapboard houses and a small garden. But there were no fields; the Wallaces did not farm. Stacey and the other students were standing in the door- way of the store when Little Man, Christopher-John, Claude, and I ran up. We squeezed through so we could see inside. A man we all knew was Kaleb Wallace stood behind the counter. A few other men sat around a stove playing checkers, and Jeremy's older brothers, R.W. and Melvin, who had dropped out of school long ago, leaned sleepy- eyed against the counter staring at us. 'Y'all go on to the back.' said Kaleb Wallace, 'lessn y'all wanna buy something. Mr. Dewberry got the music goin' already. As we turned away from the entrance, Melvin Simms said, 'Just look at all the little niggers come to dance,' and the laughter of the men filled the room. Christopher-John tugged at my arm. 'I don't like this place. Cassie. Let's go on home.' 'We can't leave without Stacey,' I said. Music beckoned from the storage room where Dewberry Wallace was placing round brown bottles on a small table as we crowded in. Aside from the table, there was no furniture in the room. Boxes lined the walls and the center floor had been cleared for dancing - several older couples from Great Faith were already engaged in movements I had never seen before. 'What they doing?' asked Little Man. I shrugged. 'I guess that's what they call dancing. There he go!' someone shouted as the back door of the storeroom slammed shut. Stacey turned quickly and sped to the back of the building. T.J. was fleeing straight toward Soldiers Road. Stacey tore across the Wallace yard and, leaping high like a forest fox, fell upon T.J., knocking him down. The two boys rolled toward the road, each trying to keep the other's back pinned to the ground, but then Stacey, who was stronger, gained the advantage and T.J., finding that he could not budge him, cried, 'Hey, wait a minute, man, let me explain - Stacey did not let him finish. Jumping up, he pulled T.J. up too and hit him squarely in the face. T.J. staggered back holding his eyes as if he were badly hurt, and Stacey momentarily let down his guard. At that moment, T.J. rammed into Stacey, forcing the fight to the ground again. Little Man, Christopher-John, and I, with the others, circled the fighters, chanting loudly as they rolled back and forth punching at each other. All of us were so engrossed in the battle that no one saw a mule wagon halt on the road and a giant man step out. It wasn't until I realized that the shouting had stopped behind us and that the girls and boys beside me were falling back that I looked up. Mr. Morrison towered above us. He did not look at me or Christopher-John or Little Man, although I knew he had seen us, but walked straight to the fighters and lifted a still-swinging Stacey off T,J. After a long, tense moment, he said to Stacey, 'You and your sister and brothers get on in the wagon.' We walked through the now-silent crowd. Kaleb and Dewbeny Wallace, standing on the front porch of the store with the Simmses, stared at Mr. Morrison as we passed, but Mr. Morrison looked through them as if they were not there. Stacey sat in front of the wagon with Mr. Morrison; the rest of us climbed into the back. 'Now we gonna get it,' shuddered ChristopherJohn. 'I told y'all we shoulda gone on home.' Before Mr. Morrison took the reins, he handed Stacey a handkerchief in which to wrap his bruised right hand, but he did not say a word and it wasn't until we had passed the crossroads leading to Great Faith that the silence was broken. 'Mr. Morrison ... you gonna tell Mama!' Stacey asked huskily. Mr. Morrison was very quiet as Jack the mule clopped noisily along the dry road. 'Seems I heard your mama tell y'all not to go up to that Wallace store,' he said at last. 'Y-yessir,' said Stacey, glancing nervously at Mr. Morrison. Then he blurted out,'But I had good reason I' 'Ain't never reason good enough to go disobey your mama.' The boys and I looked woefully at each other and my bottom stung from the awful thought of Mama's leather strap against it. 'But Mr. Morrison,' I cried anxiously, T.J. was hiding there 'cause he thought Stacey wouldn't never come down there to get him. But Stacey had to go down there 'cause T.J. was cheating and - 'Hush, Cassie,' Stacey ordered, turning sharply around. 2I faltered for only a moment before deciding that my bottom was more important than Stacey's code of honor - and Stacey had to take the blame for it and Mama whipped him right in front of God and everybody?' Once the truth had been disclosed, I waited with dry throat and nauseous stomach for Mr. Morrison to say something. When he did, all of us strained tensely forward, 'I ain't gonna tell her,' he said quietly. Christopher-John sighed with relief. 'Ain't going down there no more neither,' he promised. Little Man and I agreed. But Stacey stared long and hard at Mr. Morrison. 'How come, Mr. Morrison!' he asked. 'How come you ain't gonna tell Mama!' Mr. Morrison slowed Jack as we turned into the road leading home. "Cause I'm leaving it up to you to tell her. 'What !' we exclaimed together. 'Sometimes a person's gotta fight.' he said slowly. ‘But that store ain't the place to be doing it. From what I hear, folks like them Wallaces got no respect at all for colored folks and they just think it's funny when we fight each other. Your mama knowed them Wallaces ain't good folks, that's why she don't want y'all down there, and y'all owe it to her and y'allselves to tell her. But I'm gonna leave it up to y'all to decide.' Stacey nodded thoughtfully and wound his handkerchief tighter around his wounded hand. His face was not scarred, so if he could just figure out a way to explain the bruises on his hand to Mama without lying he was in the clear, for Mr. Morrison had not said that he had to tell her. But for some reason I could not understand he said, 'All right, Mr. Morrison, I'll tell her." 'Boy, you crazy!' I cried as Christopher-John and Little Man speedily came to the same conclusion. If he did not care about his own skin, he could at least consider ours. But he seemed not to hear us as his eyes met Mr. Morrison’s and the two of them smiled in subtle understanding, the distance between them fading, As we neared the house, Mr. Granger's Packard rolled from the dusty driveway. Mr. Morrison directed Jack to the side of the road until the big car had passed, then swung the wagon back into the road's center and up the drive. Big Ma was standing by the yard gate that led onto the drive, gazing across the road at the forest. 'Big Ma. what was Mr. Granger doing here!' Stacey asked, jumping from the wagon and going to her. Little Man, Christopher-John. and I hopped down and followed him. 'Nothin',' Big Ma replied absently, her eyes still on the forest. 'Just worryin' me 'bout this land again.' 'Oh,' said Stacey, his tone indicating that he considered the visit of no importance. Mr. Granger had always wanted the land. He turned and went to help Mr. Morrison. Little Man and Christopher-John went with him, but I remained by the gate with Big Ma. 'Big Ma.' I said, 'what Mr. Granger need more land for!' 'Don't need it,' Big Ma said flatly, 'Got more land now than he know what to do with. 'Well, what he want with ours then!' 'Just like to have it, that's all. 'Well, seems to me he's just being greedy. You ain't gonna sell it to him, are you!' Big Ma did not answer me. Instead, she pushed open the gate and walked down the drive and across the road into the forest. I ran after her. We walked in silence down the narrow cow path which wound through the old forest to the pond. As we neared the pond, the forest gaped open into a wide, brown glade, man-made by the felling of many trees, some of them still on the ground. They had been cut during the summer after Mr. Andersen came from Strawberry with an offer to buy the trees. The offer was backed with a threat, and Big Ma was afraid. So Andersen's lumbermen came, chopping and sawing, destroying the fine old trees. Papa was away on the railroad then but Mama sent Stacey for him. He returned and stopped the cutting, but not before many of the trees had already fallen. Big Ma surveyed the clearing without a word, then, step ping around the rotting trees, she made her way to the pond and sat down on one of them. I sat close beside her and waited for her to speak. After a while she shook her head and said: 'I'm she' glad your grandpa never had to see none of this. He dearly loved these here old trees. Him and me, we used to come down here early mornin's or just 'fore the sun was 'bout to set and just sit and talk. He used to call this place his thinkin' spot and he called that old pond there Caroline, after me.' She smiled vaguely, but not at me. 'You know, I ... I wasn't hardly eighteen when Paul Ed- ward married me and brung me here. He was older than me by 'bout eight years and he was smart. Ow-ow, my Lord, that was one smart man ! He had himself a mind like a steel trap. Anything he seen done, he could do it. He had done learned carpentry back up there near Macon, Georgia, where he was born. Born into slavery he was, two years 'fore freedom come, and him and his mama stayed on at that plantation after the fightin' was finished. But then when he got to be fourteen and his mama died, he left that place and worked his way 'cross here up to Vicksburg. That's where he met you, ain't it, Big Ma!' I asked, al- ready knowing the answer. Big Ma nodded, smiling. 'Sho' was. He was carpenterin' up there and my papa took me in with him to Vicksburg - we was tenant farmin' 'bout thirty miles from there - to see 'bout gettin' a store-bought rocker for my mama, and there was ole Paul Edward workin' in that furniture shop just as big. Had himself a good job, but that ole job wasn't what he wanted. He wanted himself some land. Kept on and kept on talkin' 'bout land, and then this place come up for sell. 'And he bought himself two hundred acres from that Yankee, didn't he!'