‘Wait nymph, daughter of Peneus, I beg you! I who am chasing you am not your enemy. Nymph, Wait! This is the way
a sheep runs from the wolf, a deer from the mountain lion, and a dove with fluttering wings flies from the eagle: everything flies from its foes, but it is love that is driving me to follow you! Pity me! I am afraid you might fall headlong
or thorns undeservedly scar your legs and I be a cause of grief to you! These are rough places you run through. Slow
down, I ask you, check your flight, and I too will slow. At least enquire whom it is you have charmed. I am no mountain
man, no shepherd, no rough guardian of the herds and flocks. Rash girl, you do not know, you cannot realise, who
you run from, and so you run. Delphi’s lands are mine, Claros and Tenedos, and Patara acknowledges me king. Jupiter
is my father. Through me what was, what is, and what will be, are revealed. Through me strings sound in harmony,
to song. My aim is certain, but an arrow truer than mine, has wounded my free heart! The whole world calls me the
bringer of aid; medicine is my invention; my power is in herbs. But love cannot be healed by any herb, nor can the arts
that cure others cure their lord!’
He would have said more as timid Peneïs ran, still lovely to see, leaving him with his words unfinished. The winds
bared her body, the opposing breezes in her way fluttered her clothes, and the light airs threw her streaming hair
behind her, her beauty enhanced by flight. But the young god could no longer waste time on further blandishments,
urged on by Amor, he ran on at full speed. Like a hound of Gaul starting a hare in an empty field, that heads for its
prey, she for safety: he, seeming about to clutch her, thinks now, or now, he has her fast, grazing her heels with his
outstretched jaws, while she uncertain whether she is already caught, escaping his bite, spurts from the muzzle touching her. So the virgin and the god: he driven by desire, she by fear. He ran faster, Amor giving him wings, and allowed
her no rest, hung on her fleeing shoulders, breathed on the hair flying round her neck. Her strength was gone, she 
grew pale, overcome by the effort of her rapid flight, and seeing Peneus’s waters near cried out ‘Help me father! If
your streams have divine powers change me, destroy this beauty that pleases too well!’ Her prayer was scarcely done
when a heavy numbness seized her limbs, thin bark closed over her breast, her hair turned into leaves, her arms into
branches, her feet so swift a moment ago stuck fast in slow-growing roots, her face was lost in the canopy. Only her
shining beauty was left.
Even like this Phoebus loved her and, placing his hand against the trunk, he felt her heart still quivering under the new
bark. He clasped the branches as if they were parts of human arms, and kissed the wood. But even the wood shrank
from his kisses, and the god said ‘Since you cannot be my bride, you must be my tree! Laurel, with you my hair will
be wreathed, with you my lyre, with you my quiver. You will go with the Roman generals when joyful voices acclaim
their triumph, and the Capitol witnesses their long processions. You will stand outside Augustus’s doorposts, a faithful guardian, and keep watch over the crown of oak between them. And just as my head with its un-cropped hair is
always young, so you also will wear the beauty of undying leaves.’ Paean had done: the laurel bowed her newly made
branches, and seemed to shake her leafy crown like a head giving consent.