“WELL, Piotr, not in sight yet?” was the question asked on May the 20th, 1859, by a gentleman of a little over forty, in
a dusty coat and checked trousers, who came out without his hat on to the low steps of the posting station at S ?. He
was addressing his servant, a chubby young fellow, with whitish down on his chin, and little, lack-lustre eyes.
The servant, in whom everything--the turquoise ring in his ear, the streaky hair plastered with grease, and the civility of his movements--indicated a man of the new, unproved generation, glanced with an air of indulgence along the
road, and made answer:
“No, sir; not in sight.”
“Not in sight?” repeated his master.
“No, sir,” responded the man a second time.
His master sighed, and sat down on a little bench. We will introduce him to the reader while he sits, his feet tucked
under him, gazing thoughtfully round.
His name was Nikolai Petrovitch Kirsanov. He had twelve miles from the posting station, a fine property of two
hundred souls, or, as he expressed it--since he had arranged the division of his land with the peasants, and started a
?farm?--of nearly five thousand acres. His father, a general in the army, who served in 1812, a coarse, half-educated,
but not ill-natured man, a typical Russian, had been in harness all his life, first in command of a brigade, and then of
a division, and lived constantly in the provinces, where, by virtue of his rank, he played a fairly important part. Nikolai
Petrovitch was born in the south of Russia like his elder brother, Pavel, of whom more hereafter. He was educated at
home till he was fourteen, surrounded by cheap tutors, free-and-easy but toadying adjutants, and all the usual regimental and staff set. His mother, one of the Kolyazin family, as a girl called Agathe, but as a general’s wife Agathokleya Kuzminishna Kirsanov, was one of those military ladies who take their full share of the duties and dignities of office. She wore gorgeous caps and rustling silk dresses; in church she was the first to advance to the cross; she talked
a great deal in a loud voice, let her children kiss her hand in the morning, and gave them her blessing at night--in fact,
she got everything out of life she could. Nikolai Petrovitch, as a general’s son--though so far from being distinguished
by courage that he even deserved to be called ?a funk?--was intended, like his brother Pavel, to enter the army; but
he broke his leg on the very day when the news of his commission came, and, after being two months in bed, retained a slight limp to the end of his day. His father gave him up as a bad job, and let him go into the civil service. He
took him to Petersburg directly he was eighteen, and placed him in the university. His brother happened about the
same time to be made an officer in the Guards. The young men started living together in one set of rooms, under the
remote supervision of a cousin on their mother’s side, Ilya Kolyazin, an official of high rank. Their father returned to
his division and his wife, and only rarely sent his sons large sheets of grey paper, scrawled over in a bold clerkly hand.
At the bottom of these sheets stood in letters, enclosed carefully in scroll-work, the words, “Piotr Kirsanov, GeneralMajor.” 