We have gathered here to affirm a faith, a faith in a common purpose, a common conviction, a common devotion.
Some of us have chosen America as the land of our adoption; the rest have come from those who did the same. For
this reason we have some right to consider ourselves a picked group, a group of those who had the courage to break
from the past and brave the dangers and the loneliness of a strange land. What was the object that nerved us, or
those who went before us, to this choice? We sought liberty; freedom from oppression, freedom from want, freedom
to be ourselves. This we then sought; this we now believe that we are by way of winning. What do we mean when
we say that first of all we seek liberty? I often wonder whether we do not rest our hopes too much upon constitutions, upon laws and upon courts. These are false hopes; believe me, these are false hopes. Liberty lies in the hearts of
men and women; when it dies there, no constitution, no law, no court can even do much to help it. While it lies there
it needs no constitution, no law, no court to save it. And what is this liberty which must lie in the hearts of men and
women? It is not the ruthless, the unbridled will; it is not freedom to do as one likes. That is the denial of liberty, and
leads straight to its overthrow. A society in which men recognize no check upon their freedom soon becomes a society where freedom is the possession of only a savage few; as we have learned to our sorrow.
What then is the spirit of liberty? I cannot define it; I can only tell you my own faith. The spirit of liberty is the spirit
which is not too sure that it is right; the spirit of liberty is the spirit which seeks to understand the mind of other men
and women; the spirit of liberty is the spirit which weighs their interests alongside its own without bias; the spirit of
liberty remembers that not even a sparrow falls to earth unheeded; the spirit of liberty is the spirit of Him who, near
two thousand years ago, taught mankind that lesson it has never learned but never quite forgotten; that there may be
a kingdom where the least shall be heard and considered side by side with the greatest. 