Mr. President:
I would like to speak briefly and simply about a serious national condition. It is a national feeling of fear and frustration that could result in national suicide and the end of everything that we Americans hold dear. It is a condition that
comes from the lack of effective leadership in either the Legislative Branch or the Executive Branch of our Government.
That leadership is so lacking that serious and responsible proposals are being made that national advisory commissions be appointed to provide such critically needed leadership.
I speak as briefly as possible because too much harm has already been done with irresponsible words of bitterness
and selfish political opportunism. I speak as briefly as possible because the issue is too great to be obscured by eloquence. I speak simply and briefly in the hope that my words will be taken to heart.
I speak as a Republican. I speak as a woman. I speak as a United States Senator. I speak as an American.
The United States Senate has long enjoyed worldwide respect as the greatest deliberative body in the world. But
recently that deliberative character has too often been debased to the level of a forum of hate and character assassination sheltered by the shield of congressional immunity.
It is ironical that we Senators can in debate in the Senate directly or indirectly, by any form of words, impute to any
American who is not a Senator any conduct or motive unworthy or unbecoming an American—and without that
non-Senator American having any legal redress against us—yet if we say the same thing in the Senate about our colleagues we can be stopped on the grounds of being out of order.
It is strange that we can verbally attack anyone else without restraint and with full protection and yet we hold ourselves above the same type of criticism here on the Senate Floor. Surely the United States Senate is big enough to
take self-criticism and self-appraisal. Surely we should be able to take the same kind of character attacks that we
“dish out” to outsiders.
I think that it is high time for the United States Senate and its members to do some soul-searching—for us to weigh
our consciences—on the manner in which we are performing our duty to the people of America—on the manner in
which we are using or abusing our individual powers and privileges.
I think that it is high time that we remembered that we have sworn to uphold and defend the Constitution. I think that
it is high time that we remembered that the Constitution, as amended, speaks not only of the freedom of speech but
also of trial by jury instead of trial by accusation.
Whether it be a criminal prosecution in court or a character prosecution in the Senate, there is little practical distinction when the life of a person has been ruined.
Those of us who shout the loudest about Americanism in making character assassinations are all too frequently those
who, by our own words and acts, ignore some of the basic principles of Americanism:
 The right to criticize;
 The right to hold unpopular beliefs;
 The right to protest;
 The right of independent thought.
The exercise of these rights should not cost one single American citizen his reputation or his right to a livelihood nor
should he be in danger of losing his reputation or livelihood merely because he happens to know someone who holds
unpopular beliefs. Who of us doesn’t? Otherwise none of us could call our souls our own. Otherwise thought control
would have set in.
The American people are sick and tired of being afraid to speak their minds lest they be politically smeared as “Communists” or “Fascists” by their opponents. Freedom of speech is not what it used to be in America. It has been so
abused by some that it is not exercised by others.
The American people are sick and tired of seeing innocent people smeared and guilty people whitewashed. But there
have been enough proved cases, such as the Amerasia case, the Hiss case, the Coplon case, the Gold case, to cause
the nationwide distrust and strong suspicion that there may be something to the unproved, sensational accusations.
I doubt if the Republican Party could—simply because I don’t believe the American people will uphold any political
party that puts political exploitation above national interest. Surely we Republicans aren’t that desperate for victory.
I don’t want to see the Republican Party win that way. While it might be a fleeting victory for the Republican Party, it
would be a more lasting defeat for the American people. Surely it would ultimately be suicide for the Republican Party and the two-party system that has protected our American liberties from the dictatorship of a one party system.
As members of the Minority Party, we do not have the primary authority to formulate the policy of our Government.
But we do have the responsibility of rendering constructive criticism, of clarifying issues, of allaying fears by acting as 
responsible citizens.
As a woman, I wonder how the mothers, wives, sisters, and daughters feel about the way in which members of their
families have been politically mangled in the Senate debate—and I use the word “debate” advisedly.
As a United States Senator, I am not proud of the way in which the Senate has been made a publicity platform for irresponsible sensationalism. I am not proud of the reckless abandon in which unproved charges have been hurled from
the side of the aisle. I am not proud of the obviously staged, undignified countercharges that have been attempted in
retaliation from the other side of the aisle.
I don’t like the way the Senate has been made a rendezvous for vilification, for selfish political gain at the sacrifice of
individual reputations and national unity. I am not proud of the way we smear outsiders from the Floor of the Senate
and hide behind the cloak of congressional immunity and still place ourselves beyond criticism on the Floor of the
Senate.
As an American, I am shocked at the way Republicans and Democrats alike are playing directly into the Communist
design of “confuse, divide, and conquer.” As an American, I don’t want a Democratic Administration “whitewash” or
“cover-up” any more than a want a Republican smear or witch hunt.
As an American, I condemn a Republican “Fascist” just as much I condemn a Democratic “Communist.” I condemn a
Democrat “Fascist” just as much as I condemn a Republican “Communist.” They are equally dangerous to you and me
and to our country. As an American, I want to see our nation recapture the strength and unity it once had when we
fought the enemy instead of ourselves.
It is with these thoughts that I have drafted what I call a “Declaration of Conscience.” I am gratified that Senator
Tobey, Senator Aiken, Senator Morse, Senator Ives, Senator Thye, and Senator Hendrickson have concurred in that
declaration and have authorized me to announce their concurrence.