The first edition of The Race to Save the Lord God Bird was published on August 
11, 2004, a full nine months before a gathering of prestigious scientists, con- 
servationists, and officials publicly announced that the Ivory-billed Woodpecker 
had been rediscovered in Arkansas. I was not part of the search team, and was 
informed about the claimed sightings only a few weeks before headlines ap- 
peared everywhere. 
It was a Nature Conservancy colleague who called me on a Sunday afternoon. 
“Are you sitting down?” he said. When he told me that experts, some from the 
Cornell Lab of Ornithology, had recently sighted at least one Ivory-billed Woodpecker in an Arkansas swamp forest, I remember feeling first stunned and 
then skeptical. It just didn’t seem possible. How could even a small population 
of a bird not seen for sure in a half century have survived for so long? And if the 
bird they were reporting was the last individual, how old could it be? But soon 
tendrils of hope took root. What if it’s true? I kept wondering. How cool would 
that be! 
My life as an author changed the instant the claim became public. There was 
overnight interest in my book. Sales heated up, and I was in sudden demand as 
a speaker. I flew down to Arkansas twice to give presentations and to join the 
search for signs of Ivory-bills. It was a gold-rush atmosphere of anticipation and 
excitement. Searchers paddled out every morning and came back at sundown to swap stories of finds, signs, glimpses, and near misses over dinner. I spent 
most of the next year on the road, narrating a PowerPoint presentation of the im- 
ages in Race to Save to ever larger audiences. I visited twenty-six states and gave 
about eighty presentations to crowds at museums, schools, auditoriums, 
homes, Nature Conservancy field offices, downtown theaters, rural nature cen- 
ters, a mansion in Kentucky, two zoos, and the Harvard Club of New York. A few 
times I co-presented with Gene Sparling, the kayaker who first reported seeing 
an Ivory-bill in Arkansas. We drew huge crowds. I would lead off with a presen- 
tation on the history of the Ivory-bill, its decline and attempts to save it, and then 
Gene would step forward to talk about Arkansas. He often brought audiences to 
tears. As months went by, scientists began to author articles published in scientific 
journals challenging the claimed sightings in Arkansas. Their attitude was: ex- 
traordinary claims require extraordinary proof, and what they were seeing wasn’t 
conclusive. As doubt and acrimony crept into the public discussion, my book 
appearances also took on a sharper edge. In the early, honeymoon phase, I 
would finish showing my slides, take a bow, and ask for questions. Audience 
members—shyly at first, and then with more nerve as conversation developed— 
raised their hands to discuss all sorts of things, from specifics of the Arkansas 
claims to the tragedy of extinction and what could be done about it. Those 
rooms were charged with hope and optimism.