The road, after the two wayfarers had crossed from the Peninsula to the mainland, was no other than a foot-path.
It straggled onward into the mystery of the primeval forest. This hemmed it in so narrowly, and stood so black and
dense on either side, and disclosed such imperfect glimpses of the sky above, that, to Hester’s mind, it imaged not
amiss the moral wilderness in which she had so long been wandering. The day was chill and sombre. Overhead was
a gray expanse of cloud, slightly stirred, however, by a breeze; so that a gleam of flickering sunshine might now and
then be seen at its solitary play along the path. This flitting cheerfulness was always at the further extremity of some
long vista through the forest. The sportive sunlight--feebly sportive, at best, in the predominant pensiveness of the
day and scene--withdrew itself as they came nigh, and left the spots where it had danced the drearier, because they
had hoped to find them bright.
“Mother,” said little Pearl, “the sunshine does not love you. It runs away and hides itself, because it is afraid of something on your bosom. Now, see! There it is, playing a good way off. Stand you here, and let me run and catch it. I am
but a child. It will not flee from me--for I wear nothing on my bosom yet!”
“Nor ever will, my child, I hope,” said Hester.
“And why not, mother?” asked Pearl, stopping short, just at the beginning of her race. “Will not it come of its own accord when I am a woman grown?”
“Run away, child,” answered her mother, “and catch the sunshine. It will soon be gone “
Pearl set forth at a great pace, and as Hester smiled to perceive, did actually catch the sunshine, and stood laughing
in the midst of it, all brightened by its splendor, and scintillating with the vivacity excited by rapid motion. The light
lingered about the lonely child, as if glad of such a playmate, until her mother had drawn almost nigh enough to step
into the magic circle too.
“It will go now,” said Pearl, shaking her head.
“See!” answered Hester, smiling; “now I can stretch out my hand and grasp some of it.”
As she attempted to do so, the sunshine vanished; or, to judge from the bright expression that was dancing on Pearl’s
features, her mother could have fancied that the child had absorbed it into herself, and would give it forth again, with
a gleam about her path, as they should plunge into some gloomier shade. There was no other attribute that so much
impressed her with a sense of new and untransmitted vigor in Pearl’s nature, as this never failing vivacity of spirits:
she had not the disease of sadness, which almost all children, in these latter days, inherit, with the scrofula, from the
troubles of their ancestors. Perhaps this, too, was a disease, and but the reflex of the wild energy with which Hester
had fought against her sorrows before Pearl’s birth. It was certainly a doubtful charm, imparting a hard, metallic lustre
to the child’s character. She wanted--what some people want throughout life--a grief that should deeply touch her,
and thus humanize and make her capable of sympathy. But there was time enough yet for little Pearl.
“Come, my child!” said Hester, looking about her from the spot where Pearl had stood still in the sunshine--”we will sit
down a little way within the wood, and rest ourselves.”