At sea in the old time, the execution by halter of a military sailor was generally from the fore-yard. In the present
instance, for special reasons the main-yard was assigned. Under an arm of that lee-yard the prisoner was presently
brought up, the Chaplain attending him. It was noted at the time and remarked upon afterwards, that in this final
scene the good man evinced little or nothing of the perfunctory. Brief speech indeed he had with the condemned
one, but the genuine Gospel was less on his tongue than in his aspect and manner towards him. The final preparations personal to the latter being speedily brought to an end by two boatswain’s mates, the consummation impended.
Billy stood facing aft. At the penultimate moment, his words, his only ones, words wholly unobstructed in the utterance were these -- “God bless Captain Vere!” Syllables so unanticipated coming from one with the ignominious
hemp about his neck -- a conventional felon’s benediction directed aft towards the quarters of honor; syllables too
delivered in the clear melody of a singing-bird on the point of launching from the twig, had a phenomenal effect, not
unenhanced by the rare personal beauty of the young sailor spiritualized now thro’ late experiences so poignantly
profound.
Without volition as it were, as if indeed the ship’s populace were but the vehicles of some vocal current electric, with
one voice from alow and aloft came a resonant sympathetic echo -- “God bless Captain Vere!” And yet at that instant
Billy alone must have been in their hearts, even as he was in their eyes.
At the pronounced words and the spontaneous echo that voluminously rebounded them, Captain Vere, either thro’
stoic self-control or a sort of momentary paralysis induced by emotional shock, stood erectly rigid as a musket in the
ship-armorer’s rack.
The hull deliberately recovering from the periodic roll to leeward was just regaining an even keel, when the last signal,
a preconcerted dumb one, was given. At the same moment it chanced that the vapory fleece hanging low in the East,
was shot thro’ with a soft glory as of the fleece of the Lamb of God seen in mystical vision, and simultaneously therewith, watched by the wedged mass of upturned faces, Billy ascended; and, ascending, took the full rose of the dawn.
In the pinioned figure, arrived at the yard-end, to the wonder of all no motion was apparent, none save that created
by the ship’s motion, in moderate weather so majestic in a great ship ponderously cannoned. 