Ships at a distance have every man’s wish on board. For some they
come in with the tide. For others they sail forever on the horizon, never out of sight, never landing until the Watcher turns his eyes away in
resignation, his dreams mocked to death by Time. That is the life of
men.
Now, women forget all those things they don’t want to remember,
and remember everything they don’t want to forget. The dream is the
truth. Then they act and do things accordingly.
So the beginning of this was a woman and she had come back from
burying the dead. Not the dead of sick and ailing with friends at the
pillow and the feet. She had come back from the sodden and the
bloated; the sudden dead, their eyes flung wide open in judgment.
The people all saw her come because it was sundown. The sun was
gone, but he had left his footprints in the sky. It was the time for sitting on porches beside the road. It was the time to hear things and
talk. These sitters had been tongueless, earless, eyeless conveniences
all day long. Mules and other brutes had occupied their skins. But
now, the sun and the bossman were gone, so the skins felt powerful
and human. They became lords of sounds and lesser things. They
passed nations through their mouths. They sat in judgment.
Seeing the woman as she was made them remember the envy they
had stored up from other times. So they chewed up the back parts of
their minds and swallowed with relish. They made burning statements
with questions, and killing tools out of laughs. It was mass cruelty. A
mood come alive. Words walking without masters; walking altogether
like harmony in a song.
“What she doin’ coming back here in dem overhalls? Can’t she find
no dress to put on?—Where’s dat blue satin dress she left here
in?—Where all dat money her husband took and died and left
her?—What dat ole forty year ole ’oman doin’ wid her hair swingin’
down her back lak some young gal?—Where she left dat young lad of a
boy she went off here wid?—Thought she was going to marry?—Where
he left her?—What he done wid all her money?—Betcha he off wid
some gal so young she ain’t even got no hairs—why she don’t stay in
her class?—”
When she got to where they were she turned her face on the
bander log and spoke. They scrambled a noisy “good evenin’ ” and left
their mouths setting open and their ears full of hope. Her speech was
pleasant enough, but she kept walking straight on to her gate. The
porch couldn’t talk for looking.
The men noticed her firm buttocks like she had grapefruits in her
hip pockets; the great rope of black hair swinging to her waist and unraveling in the wind like a plume; then her pugnacious breasts trying
to bore holes in her shirt. They, the men, were saving with the mind
what they lost with the eye. The women took the faded shirt and
muddy overalls and laid them away for remembrance. It was a weapon
against her strength and if it turned out of no significance, still it was a
hope that she might fall to their level some day.
But nobody moved, nobody spoke, nobody even thought to swallow spit until after her gate slammed behind her.
Pearl Stone opened her mouth and laughed real hard because she
didn’t know what else to do. She fell all over Mrs. Sumpkins while she
laughed. Mrs. Sumpkins snorted violently and sucked her teeth.
33/260
“Humph! Y’all let her worry yuh. You ain’t like me. Ah ain’t got her
to study ’bout. If she ain’t got manners enough to stop and let folks
know how she been makin’ out, let her g’wan!”
“She ain’t even worth talkin’ after,” Lulu Moss drawled through her
nose. “She sits high, but she looks low. Dat’s what Ah say ’bout dese
ole women runnin’ after young boys.”
Pheoby Watson hitched her rocking chair forward before she
spoke. “Well, nobody don’t know if it’s anything to tell or not. Me,
Ah’m her best friend, and Ah don’t know.”
“Maybe us don’t know into things lak you do, but we all know how
she went ’way from here and us sho seen her come back. ’Tain’t no use
in your tryin’ to cloak no ole woman lak Janie Starks, Pheoby, friend
or no friend.”
“At dat she ain’t so ole as some of y’all dat’s talking.”
“She’s way past forty to my knowledge, Pheoby.”
“No more’n forty at de outside.”
“She’s ’way too old for a boy like Tea Cake.”
“Tea Cake ain’t been no boy for some time. He’s round thirty his
ownself.”
“Don’t keer what it was, she could stop and say a few words with
us. She act like we done done something to her,” Pearl Stone complained. “She de one been doin’ wrong.”
“You mean, you mad ’cause she didn’t stop and tell us all her business. Anyhow, what you ever know her to do so bad as y’all make out?
34/260
The worst thing Ah ever knowed her to do was taking a few years offa
her age and dat ain’t never harmed nobody. Y’all makes me tired. De
way you talkin’ you’d think de folks in dis town didn’t do nothin’ in de
bed ’cept praise de Lawd. You have to ’scuse me, ’cause Ah’m bound to
go take her some supper.” Pheoby stood up sharply.
“Don’t mind us,” Lulu smiled, “just go right ahead, us can mind yo’
house for you till you git back. Mah supper is done. You bettah go see
how she feel. You kin let de rest of us know.”
“Lawd,” Pearl agreed, “Ah done scorched-up dat lil meat and bread
too long to talk about. Ah kin stay ’way from home long as Ah please.
Mah husband ain’t fussy.”
“Oh, er, Pheoby, if youse ready to go, Ah could walk over dere wid
you,” Mrs. Sumpkins volunteered. “It’s sort of duskin’ down dark. De
booger man might ketch yuh.”
“Naw, Ah thank yuh. Nothin’ couldn’t ketch me dese few steps
Ah’m goin’. Anyhow mah husband tell me say no first class booger
would have me. If she got anything to tell yuh, you’ll hear it.”
Pheoby hurried on off with a covered bowl in her hands. She left
the porch pelting her back with unasked questions. They hoped the
answers were cruel and strange. When she arrived at the place, Pheoby
Watson didn’t go in by the front gate and down the palm walk to the
front door. She walked around the fence corner and went in the intimate gate with her heaping plate of mulatto rice. Janie must be round
that side.
She found her sitting on the steps of the back porch with the lamps
all filled and the chimneys cleaned.
“Hello, Janie, how you comin’?”
35/260
“Aw, pretty good, Ah’m tryin’ to soak some uh de tiredness and de
dirt outa mah feet.” She laughed a little.
“Ah see you is. Gal, you sho looks good. You looks like youse yo’
own daughter.” They both laughed. “Even wid dem overhalls on, you
shows yo’ womanhood.”
“G’wan! G’wan! You must think Ah brought yuh somethin’. When
Ah ain’t brought home a thing but mahself.”
“Dat’s a gracious plenty. Yo’ friends wouldn’t want nothin’ better.”
“Ah takes dat flattery offa you, Pheoby, ’cause Ah know it’s from de
heart.” Janie extended her hand. “Good Lawd, Pheoby! ain’t you never
goin’ tuh gimme dat lil rations you brought me? Ah ain’t had a thing
on mah stomach today exceptin’ mah hand.” They both laughed easily.
“Give it here and have a seat.”
“Ah knowed you’d be hongry. No time to be huntin’ stove wood
after dark. Mah mulatto rice ain’t so good dis time. Not enough bacon
grease, but Ah reckon it’ll kill hongry.”
“Ah’ll tell you in a minute,” Janie said, lifting the cover. “Gal, it’s
too good! you switches a mean fanny round in a kitchen.”
“Aw, dat ain’t much to eat, Janie. But Ah’m liable to have
something sho nuff good tomorrow, ’cause you done come.”
Janie ate heartily and said nothing. The varicolored cloud dust that
the sun had stirred up in the sky was settling by slow degrees.
“Here, Pheoby, take yo’ ole plate. Ah ain’t got a bit of use for a
empty dish. Dat grub sho come in handy.”
36/260
Pheoby laughed at her friend’s rough joke. “Youse just as crazy as
you ever was.”
“Hand me dat wash-rag on dat chair by you, honey. Lemme scrub
mah feet.” She took the cloth and rubbed vigorously. Laughter came to
her from the big road.
“Well, Ah see Mouth-Almighty is still sittin’ in de same place. And
Ah reckon they got me up in they mouth now.”
“Yes indeed. You know if you pass some people and don’t speak
tuh suit ’em dey got tuh go way back in yo’ life and see whut you ever
done. They know mo’ ’bout yuh than you do yo’ self. An envious heart
makes a treacherous ear. They done ‘heard’ ’bout you just what they
hope done happened.”
“If God don’t think no mo’ ’bout ’em then Ah do, they’s a lost ball
in de high grass.”
“Ah hears what they say ’cause they just will collect round mah
porch ’cause it’s on de big road. Mah husband git so sick of ’em sometime he makes ’em all git for home.”
“Sam is right too. They just wearin’ out yo’ sittin’ chairs.”
“Yeah, Sam say most of ’em goes to church so they’ll be sure to rise
in Judgment. Dat’s de day dat every secret is s’posed to be made
known. They wants to be there and hear it all.”
“Sam is too crazy! You can’t stop laughin’ when youse round him.”
“Uuh hunh. He says he aims to be there hisself so he can find out
who stole his corn-cob pipe.”