“Before unearthing this letter, I had questioned myself about the ways in which a book can be infinite. I could think of
nothing other than a cyclic volume, a circular one. A book whose last page was identical with the first, a book which
had the possibility of continuing indefinitely. I remembered too that night which is at the middle of the Thousand and
One Nights when Scheherazade (through a magical oversight of the copyist) begins to relate word for word the story
of the Thousand and One Nights, establishing the risk of coming once again to the night when she must repeat it, and
thus on to infinity. I imagined as well a Platonic, hereditary work, transmitted from father to son, in which each new
individual adds a chapter or corrects with pious care the pages of his elders. These conjectures diverted me; but none
seemed to correspond, not even remotely, to the contradictory chapters of Ts’ui Pen. In the midst of this perplexity, I
received from Oxford the manuscript you have examined. I lingered, naturally, on the sentence: I leave to the various
futures (not to all) my garden o f forking paths. Almost instantly, I understood: `the garden of forking paths’ was the
chaotic novel; the phrase `the various futures (not to all)’ suggested to me the forking in time, not in space. A broad
rereading of the work confirmed the theory. In all fictional works, each time a man is confronted with several alternatives, he chooses one and eliminates the others; in the fiction of Ts’ui Pen, he chooses simultaneously-all of them. He
creates, in this way, diverse futures, diverse times which themselves also proliferate and fork. Here, then, is the explanation of the novel’s contradictions. Fang, let us say, has a secret; a stranger calls at his door; Fang resolves to kill
him. Naturally, there are several possible outcomes: Fang can kill the intruder, the intruder can kill Fang, they both can
escape, they both can die, and so forth. In the work of Ts’ui Pen, all possible outcomes occur; each one is the point of
departure for other forkings. Sometimes, the paths of this labyrinth converge: for example, you arrive at this house,
but in one of the possible pasts you are my enemy, in another, my friend. If you will resign yourself to my incurable
pronunciation, we shall read a few pages.”