One winter Pauline discovered she was pregnant. When
she told Cholly, he surprised her by being pleased. He began
to drink less and come home more often. They eased back
into a relationship more like the early days of their marriage, when he asked if she were tired or wanted him to
bring her something from the store. In this state of ease,
Pauline stopped doing day work and returned to her own
housekeeping. But the loneliness in those two rooms had not
gone away. When the winter sun hit the peeling green paint
of the kitchen chairs, when the smoked hocks were boiling
in the pot, when all she could hear was the truck delivering
furniture downstairs, she thought about back home, about
how she had been all alone most of the time then too, but
that this lonesomeness was different. Then she stopped staring at the green chairs, at the delivery truck; she went to the
movies instead. There in the dark her memory was refreshed, and she succumbed to her earlier dreams. Along
with the idea of romantic love, she was introduced to
another—physical beauty. Probably the most destructive
ideas in the history of human thought. Both originated in
envy, thrived in insecurity, and ended in disillusion. In
equating physical beauty with virtue, she stripped her mind,
bound it, and collected self-contempt by the heap. She forgot lust and simple caring for. She regarded love as possessive mating, and romance as the goal of the spirit. It would
be for her a well-spring from which she would draw the
most destructive emotions, deceiving the lover and seeking
to imprison the beloved, curtailing freedom in every way.
She was never able, after her education in the movies, to
look at a face and not assign it some category in the scale of
absolute beauty, and the scale was one she absorbed in full
from the silver screen. There at last were the darkened
woods, the lonely roads, the river banks, the gentle knowing
eyes. There the flawed became whole, the blind sighted, and
the lame and halt threw away their crutches. There death
was dead, and people made every gesture in a cloud of
music. There the black-and-white images came together,
making a magnificent whole—all projected through the ray
of light from above and behind.
It was really a simple pleasure, but she learned all there
was to love and all there was to hate.