One day he attends a panel discussion about Indian novels written in English. He feels obligated to attend; one of
the presenters on the panel, Amit, is a distant cousin who lives in Bombay, whom Gogol has never met. His mother
has asked him to greet Amit on her behalf. Gogol is bored by the panelists, who keep referring to something called
“marginality,” as if it were some sort of medical condition. For most of the hour, he sketches portraits of the panelists,
who sit hunched over their papers along a rectangular table. “Teleologically speaking, ABCDs are unable to answer
the question ‘Where are you from?’” the sociologist on the panel declares. Gogol has never heard the term ABCD. He
eventually gathers that it stands for “American-born confused deshi.” In other words, him. He learns that the C could
also stand for “conflicted.” He knows that deshi, a generic word for “countryman,” means “Indian,” knows that his
parents and all their friends always refer to India simply as desh. But Gogol never thinks of India as desh. He thinks of
it as Americans do, as India.
Gogol slouches in his seat and ponders certain awkward truths. For instance, although he can understand his mother 
tongue, and speak it fluently, he cannot read or write it with even modest proficiency. On trips to India his Americanaccented English is a source of endless amusement to his relatives, and when he and Sonia speak to each other, aunts
and uncles and cousins always shake their heads in disbelief and say, “I didn’t understand a word!” Living with a pet
name and a good name, in a place where such distinctions do not exist—surely that was emblematic of the greatest
confusion of all. He searches the audience for someone he knows, but it isn’t his crowd—lots of lit majors with leather
satchels and gold-rimmed glasses and fountain pens, lots of people Ruth would have waved to. There are also lots of
ABCDs. He has no idea there are this many on campus. He has no ABCD friends at college. He avoids them, for they
remind him too much of the way his parents choose to live, befriending people not so much because they like them,
but because of a past they happen to share. “Gogol, why aren’t you a member of the Indian association here?” Amit
asks later when they go for a drink at the Anchor. “I just don’t have the time,” Gogol says, not telling his well-meaning
cousin that he can think of no greater hypocrisy than joining an organization that willingly celebrates occasions his
parents forced him, throughout his childhood and adolescence, to attend. “I’m Nikhil now,” Gogol says, suddenly
depressed by how many more times he will have to say this, asking people to remember, reminding them to forget,
feeling as if an errata slip were perpetually pinned to his chest.