There has appeared in our time a particular class of books and articles which I sincerely and solemnly think may be
called the silliest ever known among men. They are much more wild than the wildest romances of chivalry and much
more dull than the dullest religious tract. Moreover, the romances of chivalry were at least about chivalry; the religious tracts are about religion. But these things are about nothing; they are about what is called Success. On every
bookstall, in every magazine, you may find works telling people how to succeed. They are books showing men how to
succeed in everything; they are written by men who cannot even succeed in writing books. To begin with, of course,
there is no such thing as Success. Or, if you like to put it so, there is nothing that is not successful. That a thing is successful merely means that it is; a millionaire is successful in being a millionaire and a donkey in being a donkey. Any
live man has succeeded in living; any dead man may have succeeded in committing suicide. But, passing over the
bad logic and bad philosophy in the phrase, we may take it, as these writers do, in the ordinary sense of success in
obtaining money or worldly position. These writers profess to tell the ordinary man how he may succeed in his trade
or speculation—how, if he is a builder, he may succeed as a builder; how, if he is a stockbroker, he may succeed as a
stockbroker. They profess to show him how, if he is a grocer, he may become a sporting yachtsman; how, if he is a
tenth-rate journalist, he may become a peer; and how, if he is a German Jew, he may become an Anglo-Saxon. This
is a definite and business-like proposal, and I really think that the people who buy these books (if any people do buy
them) have a moral, if not a legal, right to ask for their money back. Nobody would dare to publish a book about electricity which literally told one nothing about electricity; no one would dare publish an article on botany which showed
that the writer did not know which end of a plant grew in the earth. Yet our modern world is full of books about Success and successful people which literally contain no kind of idea, and scarcely and kind of verbal sense.
It is perfectly obvious that in any decent occupation (such as bricklaying or writing books) there are only two ways (in
any special sense) of succeeding. One is by doing very good work, the other is by cheating. Both are much too simple
to require any literary explanation. If you are in for the high jump, either jump higher than any one else, or manage
somehow to pretend that you have done so. If you want to succeed at whist, either be a good whist-player, or play
with marked cards. You may want a book about jumping; you may want a book about whist; you may want a book
about cheating at whist. But you cannot want a book about Success. Especially you cannot want a book about Success such as those which you can now find scattered by the hundred about the book-market. You may want to jump
or to play cards; but you do not want to read wandering statements to the effect that jumping is jumping, or that
games are won by winners. If these writers, for instance, said anything about success in jumping it would be something like this: ‘The jumper must have a clear aim before him. He must desire definitely to jump higher than the other
men who are in for the same competition. He must let no feeble feelings of mercy (sneaked from the sickening Little
Englanders and Pro-Boers) prevent him from trying to do his best. He must remember that a competition in jumping
is distinctly competitive, and that, as Darwin has gloriously demonstrated, THE WEAKEST GO TO THE WALL.’ That is
the kind of thing the book would say, and very useful it would be, no doubt, if read out in a low and tense voice to a
young man just about to take the high jump. Or suppose that in the course of his intellectual rambles the philosopher
of Success dropped upon our other case, that of playing cards, his bracing advice would run—’In playing cards it is
very necessary to avoid the mistake (commonly made by maudlin humanitarians and Free Traders) of permitting your
opponent to win the game. You must have grit and snap and go in to win. The days of idealism and superstition are
over. We live in a time of science and hard common sense, and it has now been definitely proved that in any game
where two are playing IF ONE DOES NOT WIN THE OTHER WILL.’ It is all very stirring, of course; but I confess that if I
were playing cards I would rather have some decent little book which told me the rules of the game. 