MOST PEOPLE WHO BOTHER with the matter at all would admit that the English language is in a bad way,
but it is generally assumed that we cannot by conscious action do anything about it. Our civilization is decadent,
and our language--so the argument runs--must inevitably share in the general collapse. It follows that any
struggle against the abuse of language is a sentimental archaism, like preferring candles to electric light or
hansom cabs to aeroplanes. Underneath this lies the half-conscious belief that language is a natural growth and
not an instrument which we shape for our own purposes.
 Now, it is clear that the decline of a language must ultimately have political and economic causes: it is not due
simply to the bad influence of this or that individual writer. But an effect can become a cause, reinforcing the
original cause and producing the same effect in an intensified form, and so on indefinitely. A man may take to
drink because he feels himself to be a failure, and then fail all the more completely because he drinks. It is rather
the same thing that is happening to the English language. It becomes ugly and inaccurate because our thoughts are
foolish, but the slovenliness of our language makes it easier for us to have foolish thoughts. The point is that the
process is reversible. Modern English, especially written English, is full of bad habits which spread by imitation
and which can be avoided if one is willing to take the necessary trouble. If one gets rid of these habits one can
think more clearly, and to think clearly is a necessary first step towards political regeneration: so that the fight
against bad English is not frivolous and is not the exclusive concern of professional writers. I will come back to
this presently, and I hope that by that time the meaning of what I have said here will have become clearer.
Meanwhile, here are five specimens of the English language as it is now habitually written.
 These five passages have not been picked out because they are especially bad--I could have quoted far worse
if I had chosen--but because they illustrate various of the mental vices from which we now suffer. They are a
little below the average, but are fairly representative samples. I number them so that I can refer back to them
when necessary:
 I am not, indeed, sure whether it is not true to say that the Milton who once seemed not unlike a
seventeenth-century Shelley had not become, out of an experience ever more bitter in each year, more alien (sic)
to the founder of that Jesuit sect which nothing could induce him to tolerate.
 PROFESSOR HAROLD LASKI (Essay in Freedom of Expression)
 Above all, we cannot play ducks and drakes with a native battery of idioms which prescribes such
egregious collocations of vocables as the Basic put up with for tolerate or put at a loss for bewilder.
 PROFESSOR LANCELOT HOGBEN (Interglossa)
 On the one side we have the free personality; by definition it is not neurotic, for it has neither conflict nor
dream. Its desires, such as they are, are transparent, for they are just what institutional approval keeps in the
forefront of consciousness; another institutional pattern would alter their number and intensity; there is little in
them that is natural, irreducible, or culturally dangerous. But on the other side, the social bond itself is nothing but
the mutual reflection of these self-secure integrities. Recall the definition of love. Is not this the very picture of a
small academic? Where is there a place in this hall of mirrors for either personality or fraternity?
 ESSAY ON PSYCHOLOGY in Politics (New York)
 All the "best people" from the gentlemen's clubs, and all the frantic fascist captains, united in common
hatred of Socialism and bestial horror of the rising tide of the mass revolutionary movement, have turned to acts
of provocation, to foul incendiarism, to medieval legends of poisoned wells, to legalize their own destruction of
proletarian organizations, and rouse the agitated petty-bourgeoisie to chauvinistic fervor on behalf of the fight
against the revolutionary way out of the crisis.
 COMMUNIST PAMPHLET
 If a new spirit is to be infused into this old country, there is one thorny and contentious reform which must
be tackled, and that is the humanization and galvanization of the B.B.C. Timidity here will bespeak canker and
atrophy of the soul. The heart of Britain may lee sound and of strong beat, for instance, but the British lion's roar
at present is like that of Bottom in Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream--as gentle as any sucking dove. A
virile new Britain cannot continue indefinitely to be traduced in the eyes, or rather ears, of the world by the effete languors of Langham Place, brazenly masquerading as "standard English." When the Voice of Britain is heard at
nine o'clock, better far and infinitely less ludicrous to hear aitches honestly dropped than the present priggish,
inflated, inhibited, school-ma'am-ish arch braying of blameless bashful mewing maidens.
 LETTER IN Tribune
 Each of these passages has faults of its own, but quite apart from avoidable ugliness, two qualities are
common to all of them. The first is staleness of imagery; the other is lack of precision. The writer either has a
meaning and cannot express it, or he inadvertently says something else, or he is almost indifferent as to whether
his words mean anything or not. This mixture of vagueness and sheer incompetence is the most marked
characteristic of modern English prose, and especially of any kind of political writing. As soon as certain topics
are raised, the concrete melts into the abstract and no one seems able to think of turns of speech that are not
hackneyed: prose consists less and less of words chosen for the sake of their meaning, and more and more of
phrases tacked together like the sections of a prefabricated hen-house. I list below, with notes and examples,
various of the tricks by means of which the work of prose-construction is habitually dodged:
 Dying metaphors. A newly-invented metaphor assists thought by evoking a visual image, while on the other
hand a metaphor which is technically "dead" (e.g., iron resolution) has in effect reverted to being an ordinary
word and can generally be used without loss of vividness. But in between these two classes there is a huge dump
of worn-out metaphors which have lost all evocative power and are merely used because they save people the
trouble of inventing phrases for themselves. Examples are: Ring the changes on, take up the cudgels for, toe the
line, ride roughshod over, stand shoulder to shoulder with, play into the hands of, an axe to grind, grist to the mill,
fishing in troubled waters, on the order of the day, Achilles' heel, swan song, hotbed. Many of these are used
without knowledge of their meaning (what is a "rift," for instance?), and incompatible metaphors are frequently
mixed, a sure sign that the writer is not interested in what he is saying. Some metaphors now current have been
twisted out of their original meaning without those who use them even being aware of the fact. For example, toe
the line is sometimes written tow the line. Another example is the hammer and the anvil, now always used with
the implication that the anvil gets the worst of it. In real life it is always the anvil that breaks the hammer, never
the other way about: a writer who stopped to think what he was saying would be aware of this, and would avoid
perverting the original phrase.
 Operators, or verbal false limbs. These save the trouble of picking out appropriate verbs and nouns, and at the
same time pad each sentence with extra syllables which give it an appearance of symmetry. Characteristic phrases
are: render inoperative, militate against, prove unacceptable, make contact with, be subjected to, give rise to, give
grounds for, having the effect of, play a leading part (role) in, make itself felt, take effect, exhibit a tendency to,
serve the purpose of, etc., etc. The keynote is the elimination of simple verbs. Instead of being a single word, such
as break, stop, spoil, mend, kill, a verb becomes a phrase, made up of a noun or adjective tacked on to some
general-purposes verb as prove, serve, form, play, render. In addition, the passive voice is wherever possible used
in preference to the active, and noun constructions are used instead of gerunds (by examination of instead of by
examining). The range of verbs is further cut down by means of the -ize and de- formations, and banal
statements are given an appearance of profundity by means of the not un- formation. Simple conjunctions and
prepositions are replaced by such phrases as with respect to, having regard to, the fact that, by dint of, in view of,
in the interests of, on the hypothesis that; and the ends of sentences are saved from anti-climax by such
resounding commonplaces as greatly to be desired, cannot be left out of account, a development to be expected in
the near future, deserving of serious consideration, brought to a satisfactory conclusion, and so on and so forth.
 Pretentious diction. Words like phenomenon, element, individual (as noun), objective, categorical, effective,
virtual, basis, primary, promote, constitute, exhibit, exploit, utilize, eliminate, liquidate, are used to dress up
simple statements and give an air of scientific impartiality to biased judgments. Adjectives like epoch-making,
epic, historic, unforgettable, triumphant, age-old, inevitable, inexorable, veritable, are used to dignify the sordid
processes of international politics, while writing that aims at glorifying war usually takes on an archaic color, its
characteristic words being: realm, throne, chariot, mailed fist, trident, sword, shield, buckler, banner, jackboot,
clarion. Foreign words and expressions such as cul de sac, ancien regime, deus ex machina, mutatis mutandis,
status quo, gleichschaltung, weltanschauung, are used to give an air of culture and elegance. Except for the useful
abbreviations i.e., e.g., and etc., there is no real need for any of the hundreds of foreign phrases now current in
English. Bad writers, and especially scientific, political and sociological writers, are nearly always haunted by the
notion that Latin or Greek words are grander than Saxon ones, and unnecessary words like expedite, ameliorate,
predict, extraneous, deracinated, clandestine, subaqueous and hundreds of others constantly gain ground from
their Anglo-Saxon opposite numbers.
 The jargon peculiar to Marxist writing (hyena, hangman, cannibal, petty bourgeois, these gentry, lackey,
flunkey, mad dog, White Guard, etc.) consists largely of words and phrases translated from Russian, German or
French; but the normal way of coining a new word is to use a Latin or Greek root with the appropriate affix and,
where necessary, the -ize formation. It is often easier to make up words of this kind (de-regionalize,
impermissible, extramarital, non-fragmentary and so forth) than to think up the English words that will cover
one's meaning. The result, in general, is an increase in slovenliness and vagueness.
 An interesting illustration of this is the way in which the English flower names which were in use till very
recently are being ousted by Greek ones, snap-dragon becoming antirrhinum, forget-me-not becoming myosotis,
etc. It is hard to see any practical reason for this change of fashion: it is probably due to an instinctive
turning-away from the more homely word and a vague feeling that the Greek word is scientific.
 Meaningless words. In certain kinds of writing, particularly in art criticism and literary criticism, it is normal
to come across long passages which are almost completely lacking in meaning. Words like romantic, plastic,
values, human, dead, sentimental, natural, vitality, as used in art criticism, are strictly meaningless, in the sense
that they not only do not point to any discoverable object, but are hardly even expected to do so by the reader.
When one critic writes, "The outstanding feature of Mr. X's work is its living quality," while another writes, "The
immediately striking thing about Mr. X's work is its peculiar deadness, the reader accepts this as a simple
difference of opinion If words like black and white were involved, instead of the jargon words dead and living, he
would see at once that language was being used in an improper way. Many political words are similarly abused.
The word Fascism has now no meaning except in so far as it signifies "something not desirable." The words
democracy, socialism, freedom, patriotic, realistic, justice, have each of them several different meanings which
cannot be reconciled with one another. In the case of a word like democracy, not only is there no agreed
definition, but the attempt to make one is resisted from all sides. It is almost universally felt that when we call a
country democratic we are praising it: consequently the defenders of every kind of régime claim that it is a
democracy, and fear that they might have to stop using the word if it were tied down to any one meaning. Words
of this kind are often used in a consciously dishonest way. That is, the person who uses them has his own private
definition, but allows his hearer to think he means something quite different. Statements like Marshal Pétain was a
true patriot, The Soviet Press is the freest in the world, The Catholic Church is opposed to persecution, are almost
always made with intent to deceive. Other words used in variable meanings, in most cases more or less
dishonestly, are: class, totalitarian, science, progressive, reactionary bourgeois, equality.
 Example: "Comfort's catholicity of perception and image, strangely Whitmanesque in range, almost the exact
opposite in aesthetic compulsion, continues to evoke that trembling atmospheric accumulative hinting at a cruel,
an inexorably serene timelessness . . . Wrey Gardiner scores by aiming at simple bullseyes with precision. Only
they are not so simple, and through this contented sadness runs more than the surface bittersweet of resignation."
(Poetry Quarterly.)
 Now that I have made this catalogue of swindles and perversions, let me give another example of the kind of
writing that they lead to. This time it must of its nature be an imaginary one. I am going to translate a passage of
good English into modern English of the worst sort. Here is a well-known verse from Ecclesiastes:
 I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread
to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth
to them all.
 Here it is in modern English:
 Objective consideration of contemporary phenomena compels the conclusion that success or failure in
competitive activities exhibits no tendency to be commensurate with innate capacity, but that a considerable
element of the unpredictable must invariably be taken into account.
 This is a parody, but not a very gross one. Exhibit (3), above, for instance, contains several patches of the
same kind of English. It will be seen that I have not made a full translation. The beginning and ending of the
sentence follow the original meaning fairly closely, but in the middle the concrete illustrations--race, battle,
bread--dissolve into the vague phrase "success or failure in competitive activities." This had to be so, because no
modern writer of the kind I am discussing--no one capable of using phrases like objective consideration of
contemporary phenomena"--would ever tabulate his thoughts in that precise and detailed way. The whole
tendency of modern prose is away from concreteness. Now analyze these two sentences a little more closely. The
first contains 49 words but only 60 syllables, and all its words are those of everyday life. The second contains 38
words of 90 syllables: 18 of its words are from Latin roots, and one from Greek. The first sentence contains six
vivid images, and only one phrase ("time and chance") that could be called vague. The second contains not a
single fresh, arresting phrase, and in spite of its 90 syllables it gives only a shortened version of the meaning
contained in the first. Yet without a doubt it is the second kind of sentence that is gaining ground in modern
English. I do not want to exaggerate. This kind of writing is not yet universal, and outcrops of simplicity will
occur here and there in the worst-written page. Still, if you or I were told to write a few lines on the uncertainty of
human fortunes, we should probably come much nearer to my imaginary sentence than to the one from
Ecclesiastes.
 As I have tried to show, modern writing at its worst does not consist in picking out words for the sake of their
meaning and inventing images in order to make the meaning clearer. It consists in gumming together long strips
of words which have already been set in order by someone else, and making the results presentable by sheer
humbug. The attraction of this way of writing, is that it is easy. It is easier--even quicker, once you have the
habit--to say In my opinion it is a not unjustifiable assumption that than to say I think. If you use ready-made
phrases, you not only don't have to hunt about for words; you also don't have to bother with the rhythms of your
sentences, since these phrases are generally so arranged as to be more or less euphonious. When you are
composing in a hurry--when you are dictating to a stenographer, for instance, or making a public speech--it is
natural to fall into a pretentious, Latinized style. Tags like a consideration which we should do well to bear in
mind or a conclusion to which all of us would readily assent will save many a sentence from coming down with a
bump. By using stale metaphors, similes and idioms, you save much mental effort at the cost of leaving your
meaning vague, not only for your reader but for yourself. This is the significance of mixed metaphors. The sole
aim of a metaphor is to call up a visual image. When these images clash--as in The Fascist octopus has sung its
swan song, the jackboot is thrown into the melting pot--it can be taken as certain that the writer is not seeing a
mental image of the objects he is naming; in other words he is not really thinking. Look again at the examples I
gave at the beginning of this essay. Professor Laski (1) uses five negatives in 53 words. One of these is
superfluous, making nonsense of the whole passage, and in addition there is the slip alien for akin, making further
nonsense, and several avoidable pieces of clumsiness which increase the general vagueness. Professor Hogben (2)
plays ducks and drakes with a battery which is able to write prescriptions, and, while disapproving of the
everyday phrase put up with, is unwilling to look egregious up in the dictionary and see what it means. (3), if one
takes an uncharitable attitude towards it, is simply meaningless: probably one could work out its intended
meaning by reading the whole of the article in which it occurs. In (4), the writer knows more or less what he
wants to say, but an accumulation of stale phrases chokes him like tea leaves blocking a sink. In (5), words and
meaning have almost parted company. People who write in this manner usually have a general emotional
meaning--they dislike one thing and want to express solidarity with another--but they are not interested in the
detail of what they are saying. A scrupulous writer, in every sentence that he writes, will ask himself at least four
questions, thus: What am I trying to say? What words will express it? What image or idiom will make it clearer?
Is this image fresh enough to have an effect? And he will probably ask himself two more: Could I put it more
shortly? Have I said anything that is avoidably ugly? But you are not obliged to go to all this trouble. You can
shirk it by simply throwing your mind open and letting the ready-made phrases come crowding in. They will
construct your sentences for you--even think your thoughts for you, to a certain extent-and at need they will
perform the important service of partially concealing your meaning even from yourself. It is at this point that the
special connection between politics and the debasement of language becomes clear.
 In our time it is broadly true that political writing is bad writing. Where it is not true, it will generally be found
that the writer is some kind of rebel, expressing his private opinions and not a "party line." Orthodoxy, of
whatever color, seems to demand a lifeless, imitative style. The political dialects to be found in pamphlets,
leading articles, manifestoes, White Papers and the speeches of under-secretaries do, of course, vary from party
to party, but they are all alike in that one almost never finds in them a fresh, vivid, home-made turn of speech.
When one watches some tired hack on the platform mechanically repeating the familiar phrases--bestial
atrocities, iron heel, bloodstained tyranny, free peoples of the world, stand shoulder to shoulder--one often has a
curious feeling that one is not watching a live human being but some kind of dummy: a feeling which suddenly
becomes stronger at moments when the light catches the speaker's spectacles and turns them into blank discs
which seem to have no eyes behind them. And this is not altogether fanciful. A speaker who uses that kind of
phraseology has gone some distance towards turning himself into a machine. The appropriate noises are coming
out of his larynx, but his brain is not involved as it would be if he were choosing his words for himself. If the
speech he is making is one that he is accustomed to make over and over again, he may be almost unconscious of
what he is saying, as one is when one utters the responses in church. And this reduced state of consciousness, if
not indispensable, is at any rate favorable to political conformity.
 In our time, political speech and writing are largely the defense of the indefensible. Things like the
continuance of British rule in India, the Russian purges and deportations, the dropping of the atom bombs on
Japan, can indeed be defended, but only by arguments which are too brutal for most people to face, and which do
not square with the professed aims of political parties. Thus political language has to consist largely of
euphemism, question-begging and sheer cloudy vagueness. Defenseless villages are bombarded from the air, the
inhabitants driven out into the countryside, the cattle machine-gunned, the huts set on fire with incendiary bullets:
this is called pacification. Millions of peasants are robbed of their farms and sent trudging along the roads with no
more than they can carry: this is called transfer of population or rectification of frontiers. People are imprisoned
for years without trial, or shot in the back of the neck or sent to die of scurvy in Arctic lumber camps: this is
called elimination of unreliable elements. Such phraseology is needed if one wants to name things without calling
up mental pictures of them. Consider for instance some comfortable English professor defending Russian
totalitarianism. He cannot say outright, "I believe in killing off your opponents when you can get good results by
doing so." Probably, therefore, he will say something like this:
 While freely conceding that the Soviet régime exhibits certain features which the humanitarian may be
inclined to deplore, we must, I think, agree that a certain curtailment of the right to political opposition is an
unavoidable concomitant of transitional periods, and that the rigors which the Russian people have been called
upon to undergo have been amply justified in the sphere of concrete achievement.