Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen of the Convention: I would be presumptuous, indeed, to
present myself against the distinguished gentlemen to whom you have listened if this
were a mere measuring of abilities; but this is not a contest between persons. The
humblest citizen in all the land, when clad in the armor of a righteous cause, is stronger
than all the hosts of error. I come to speak to you in defense of a cause as holy as the
cause of liberty--the cause of humanity. ....
Never before in the history of this country has there been witnessed such a contest as that
through which we have just passed. Never before in the history of American politics has a
great issue been fought out as this issue has been, by the voters of a great party. ....
With a zeal approaching the zeal which inspired the crusaders who followed Peter the
hermit, our silver Democrats went forth from victory unto victory until they are now
assembled, not to discuss, not to debate, but to enter up the judgment already rendered by
the plain people of this country. In this contest brother has been arrayed against brother,
father against son. the warmest ties of love, acquaintance and association have been
disregarded; old leaders have been cast aside when they have refused to give expression
to the sentiments of those whom they would lead, and new leaders have sprung up to give
direction to the cause of truth. Thus has the contest been waged, and we have assembled
here under as binding and solemn instructions as were ever imposed upon representatives
of the people. ....
The gentleman who preceded me (ex-Governor Russell) spoke of the State of
Massachusetts; let me assure him that not one present in all this convention entertains the
least hostility to the people of the State of Massachusetts, but we stand here representing
people who are the equals, before the law, of the greatest citizens in the State of
Massachusetts. When you [turning to the gold delegates] come before us and tell us that
we are about to disturb your business interests, we reply that you have disturbed our
business interests by your course.
We say to you that you have made the definition of a business man too limited in its
application. The man who is employed for wages is as much a business man as his
employer; the attorney in a country town is as much a business man as the corporation
counsel in a great metropolis; the merchant at the cross-roads store is as much a business
man as the merchant of New York; the farmer who goes forth in the morning and toils all
day--who begins in the spring and toils all summer—and who by the application of brain
and muscle to the natural resources of the country creates wealth, is as much a business
man as the man who goes upon the board of trade and bets upon the price of grain; the
miners who go down a thousand feet into the earth, or climb two thousand feet upon the
cliffs, and bring forth from their hiding places the precious metals to be poured into the
channels of trade are as much business men as the few financial magnates who, in a back
room, corner the money of the world. We come to speak for this broader class of business
men.
Ah, my friends, we say not one word against those who live upon the Atlantic coast, but
the hardy pioneers who have braved all the dangers of the wilderness, who have made the
desert to blossom as the rose--the pioneers away out there [pointing to the West], who
rear their children near to Nature's heart, where they can mingle their voices with the
voices of the birds--out there where they have erected schoolhouses for the education of
their young, churches where they praise their Creator, and cemeteries where rest the
ashes of their dead--these people, we say, are as deserving of the consideration of our
party as any people in this country. It is for these that we speak. We do not come as
aggressors. Our war is not a war of conquest; we are fighting in the defense of our homes,
our families, and posterity. We have petitioned, and our petitions have been scorned; we
have entreated, and our entreaties have been disregarded; we have begged, and they have
mocked when our calamity came. We beg no longer; we entreat no more; we petition no
more. We defy them.
The gentleman from Wisconsin [Senator Vilas] has said that he fears a Robespierre. My
friends, in this land of the free you need not fear that a tyrant will spring up from among
the people. What we need is an Andrew Jackson to stand, as Jackson stood, against the
encroachments of organized wealth.
They tell us that this platform was made to catch votes. We reply to them that changing
conditions make new issues; that the principles upon which Democracy rests are as
everlasting as the hills, but that they must be applied to new conditions as they arise.
Conditions have arisen, and we are here to meet those conditions. They tell us that the
income tax ought not to be brought in here; that it is a new idea. They criticize us for our
criticism of the Supreme Court of the United States. My friends, we have not criticized;
we have simply called attention to what you already know. If you want criticisms, read
the dissenting opinions of the court. There you will find criticisms. They say that we
passed an unconstitutional law; we deny it. The income tax law was not unconstitutional
when it was passed; it was not unconstitutional when it went before the Supreme Court
for the first time; it did not become unconstitutional until one of the judges changed his
mind, and we cannot be expected to know when a judge will change his mind. The
income tax is just. It simply intends to put the burdens of government justly upon the
backs of the people. I am in favor of an income tax. When I find a man who is not willing
to bear his share of the burdens of the government which protects him, I find a man who
is unworthy to enjoy the blessings of a government like ours.
They say that we are opposing national bank currency; it is true. If you will read what
Thomas Benton said, you will find he said that, in searching history, he could find but
one parallel to Andrew Jackson; that was Cicero, who destroyed the conspiracy of
Cataline and saved Rome. Benton said that Cicero only did for Rome what Jackson did
for us when he destroyed the bank conspiracy and saved America. We say in our platform
that we believe that the right to coin and issue money is a function of government. We
believe it. We believe that it is a part of sovereignty, and can no more with safety be
delegated to private individuals than we could afford to delegate to private individuals the
power to make penal statutes or levy taxes. Mr. Jefferson, who was once regarded as
good Democratic authority, seems to have differed in opinion from the gentleman who
has addressed us on the part of the minority. Those who are opposed to this proposition
tell us that the issue of paper money is a function of the bank, and that the Government
ought to go out of the banking business. I stand with Jefferson rather than with them, and
tell them, as he did, that the issue of money is a function of government, and that the
banks ought to go out of the governing business.
They complain about the plank which declares against life tenure in office. They have
tried to strain it to mean that which it does not mean. What we oppose by that plank is the
life tenure which is being built up in Washington, and which excludes from participation
in official benefits the humbler members of society.
Let me call your attention to two or three important things. The gentleman from New
York says that he will propose an amendment to the platform providing that the proposed
change in our monetary system shall not affect contracts already made. Let me remind
you that there is no intention of affecting those contracts which according to present laws
are made payable in gold; but if he means to say that we cannot change our monetary
system without protecting those who have loaned money before the change was made, I
desire to ask him where, in law or in morals, he can find justification for not protecting
the debtors when the act of 1873 was passed, if he now insists that we must protect the
creditors.
He says he will also propose an amendment which will provide for the suspension of free
coinage if we fail to maintain the parity within a year. We reply that when we advocate a
policy which we believe will be successful, we are not compelled to raise a doubt as to
our own sincerity by suggesting what we shall do if we fail. I ask him, if he would apply
his logic to us, why he does not apply it to himself. He says he wants this country to try to
secure an international agreement. Why does he not tell us what he is going to do if he
fails to secure an international agreement? There is more reason for him to do that than
there is for us to provide against the failure to maintain the parity. Our opponents have
tried for twenty years to secure an international agreement, and those are waiting for it
most patiently who do not want it at all.
And now, my friends, let me come to the paramount issue. If they ask us why it is that we
say more on the money question than we say upon the tariff question, I reply that, if
protection has slain its thousands, the gold standard has slain its tens of thousands. If they
ask us why we do not embody in our platform all the things that we believe in, we reply
that when we have restored the money of the Constitution all other necessary reforms will
be possible; but that until this is done there is no other reform that can be accomplished.
Why is it that within three months such a change has come over the country? Three
months ago, when it was confidently asserted that those who believe in the gold standard
would frame our platform and nominate our candidates, even the advocates of the gold
standard did not think that we could elect a president. And they had good reason for their
doubt, because there is scarcely a State here today asking for the gold standard which is
not in the absolute control of the Republican party. But note the change. Mr. McKinley
was nominated at St. Louis upon a platform which declared for the maintenance of the
gold standard until it can be changed into bimetallism by international agreement. Mr.
McKinley was the most popular man among the Republicans, and three months ago
everybody in the Republican party prophesied his election. How is it today? Why, the
man who was once pleased to think that he looked like Napoleon--that man shudders
today when he remembers that he was nominated on the anniversary of the battle of
Waterloo. Not only that, but as he listens he can hear with ever-increasing distinctness the
sound of the waves as they beat upon the lonely shores of St. Helena.
Why this change? Ah, my friends, is not the reason for the change evident to any one
who will look at the matter? No private character, however pure, no personal popularity,
however great, can protect from the avenging wrath of an indignant people a man who
will declare that he is in favor of fastening the gold standard upon this country, or who is
willing to surrender the right of self-government and place the legislative control of our
affairs in the hands of foreign potentates and powers.
We go forth confident that we shall win. Why? Because upon the paramount issue of this
campaign there is not a spot of ground upon which the enemy will dare to challenge
battle. If they tell us that the gold standard is a good thing, we shall point to their platform
and tell them that their platform pledges the party to get rid of the gold standard and
substitute bimetallism. If the gold standard is a good thing, why try to get rid of it? I call
your attention to the fact that some of the very people who are in this convention today
and who tell us that we ought to declare in favor of international bimetallism--thereby
declaring that the gold standard is wrong and that the principle of bimetallism is better--
these very people four months ago were open and avowed advocates of the gold standard,
and were then telling us that we could not legislate two metals together, even with the aid
of all the world. If the gold standard is a good thing, we ought to declare in favor of its
retention and not in favor of abandoning it; and if the gold standard is a bad thing why
should we wait until other nations are willing to help us to let go? Here is the line of
battle, and we care not upon which issue they force the fight; we are prepared to meet
them on either issue or on both. If they tell us that the gold standard is the standard of
civilization, we reply to them that this, the most enlightened of all the nations of the
earth, has never declared for a gold standard and that both the great parties this year are
declaring against it. If the gold standard is the standard of civilization, why, my friends,
should we not have it? If they come to meet us on that issue we can present the history of
our nation. More than that; we can tell them that they will search the pages of history in
vain to find a single instance where the common people of any land have ever declared
themselves in favor of the gold standard. They can find where the holders of the fixed
investments have declared for a gold standard, but not where the masses have.
Mr. Carlisle said in 1878 that this was a struggle between "the idle holders of idle capital"
and "the struggling masses, who produce the wealth and pay the taxes of the country;"
and, my friends, the question we are to decide is: Upon which side will the Democratic
party fight; upon the side of "the idle holders of idle capital" or upon the side of "the
struggling masses?" That is the question which the party must answer first, and then it
must be answered by each individual hereafter. The sympathies of the Democratic party,
as shown by the platform, are on the side of the struggling masses who have ever been
the foundation of the Democratic party. There are two ideas of government. There are
those who believe that, if you will only legislate to make the well-to-do prosperous, their
prosperity will leak through on those below. The Democratic idea, however, has been that
if you legislate to make the masses prosperous, their prosperity will find its way up
through every class which rests upon them.
You come to us and tell us that the great cities are in favor of the gold standard; we reply
that the great cities rest upon our broad and fertile prairies. Burn down your cities and
leave our farms, and your cities will spring up again as if by magic; but destroy our farms
and the grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country.
My friends, we declare that this nation is able to legislate for its own people on every
question, without waiting for the aid or consent of any other nation on earth; and upon
that issue we expect to carry every State in the Union. I shall not slander the inhabitants
of the fair State of Massachusetts nor the inhabitants of the State of New York by saying
that, when they are confronted with the proposition, they will declare that this nation is
not able to attend to its own business. It is the issue of 1776 over again. Our ancestors,
when but three millions in number, had the courage to declare their political
independence of every other nation; shall we, their descendants, when we have grown to
seventy millions, declare that we are less independent than our forefathers? No, my
friends, that will never be the verdict of our people. Therefore, we care not upon what
lines the battle is fought. If they say bimetallism is good, but that we cannot have it until
other nations help us, we reply that, instead of having a gold standard because England
has, we will restore bimetallism, and then let England have bimetallism because the
United States has it. If they dare to come out in the open field and defend the gold
standard as a good thing, we will fight them to the uttermost.
Having behind us the producing masses of this nation and the world, supported by the
commercial interests, the laboring interests, and the toilers everywhere, we will answer
their demand for a gold standard by saying to them: You shall not press down upon the
brow of labor this crown of thorns, you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.