From its colonial and Native American origins unto the present day, American 
architecture has been exceptionally complex, both in the multiple traditions from 
which it has drawn and in the variations of style and public response it has pro- 
duced. Architecture has also been caught up in the commercial domain. Major 
commercial buildings—business blocks and department stores in the nineteenth 
century, office towers and shopping malls in the twentieth—dominate the public 
domain of most cities. There has been no official patronage of certain firms for He learned to box while a teenager, and his exceptional skills quickly became evi- 
dent. By 1959 he had won a national Golden Gloves championship. Following his 
success as a member of the 1960 U.S. Olympic boxing team, he signed a profes- 
sional contract with Louisville promoters and soon became a contender for the 
heavyweight boxing crown. Brashly outspoken about racial issues, he also bragged 
about his pugilistic ability, often proclaiming, “I am the greatest.” His facile rhymes 
and sometimes accurate knockout predictions attracted the attention of boxing 
fans. 
As he was perfecting his boxing and promotional skills, he became affiliated with 
the Nation of Islam, an all-black religious group, often labeled the Black Muslims, 
led by Elijah Muhammad. He became close friends with the Nation’s best-known 
spokesman, Malcolm X, but remained loyal to Elijah Muhammad after Malcolm’s 
1964 break with him. Recognizing that the Nation of Islam was notorious because 
of its advocacy of black self-defense and racial separatism, Clay kept his affiliation 
with the group secret until February 1964, when he defeated Sonny Liston and be- 
came heavyweight champion. He then announced his religious ties and stated that 
he had rejected his “slave” name in favor of the new name Muhammad Ali. 
For a decade thereafter, Ali remained at the center of controversy. Many re- 
porters and boxing officials continued to refer to him as Cassius Clay and some 
even demanded that his title be withdrawn. The hostility increased when he refused 
in 1967 to be inducted into the army, citing the fact that his religion forbade him 
from doing so. Government officials were unwilling to accept his claim that he was 
a lay Islamic minister, especially when he made clear his lack of sympathy.