We whose names are underwritten … doe by these presents 
solemnly & mutualy in the presence of God, and one of an- 
other, covenant & combine our selves togeather into a civill 
body politick. 
 
The settling of America began with an idea. The idea was that the citizens of a soci- 
ety could join freely and agree to govern themselves by making laws for the com- 
mon good. 
 
On November 11, 1620, after sixty-six days at sea, the sailing ship Mayflower ap- 
proached land. On board were 102 passengers. Their destination was the area at 
the mouth of the Hudson River, but because of rough seas they missed their goal 
and anchored in what is now Provincetown Harbor off Cape Cod. Since it was late 
autumn, they decided to make their landing there rather than to sail on. And since 
they were no longer in the territory for which they had a patent, they signed a 
covenant before they landed in order to establish a basis for self-government by 
which all of them were bound. 
 
About a third of the passengers were members of an English separatist congre- 
gation that had earlier fled to Leyden, the Netherlands, in search of religious free- 
dom. The entire group of English colonists was later called the Pilgrims. The 
colonists had negotiated an agreement with the Virginia Company of London that 
gave them the right to locate wherever they chose in that company’s vast holdings 
and to govern themselves. 
 
Forty-one of the male passengers signed the covenant aboard ship. In what was 
later known as the Mayflower Compact, the signers pledged to create a body politic that would be based on the consent of the governed and ruled by law. And they fur- 
ther agreed to submit to the laws framed by the new body politic. 
 
The compact was signed by every head of a family, every adult bachelor, and 
most of the hired manservants aboard the Mayflower. It was signed both by sepa- 
ratists and non-separatists. Women were not asked to sign, since they did not have 
political rights. 
 
On the day after Christmas, the 102 settlers disembarked at what is now Ply- 
mouth, Massachusetts. Those who had signed the compact became the governing 
body of the Plymouth colony, with the power to elect officers, pass laws, and admit 
new voting members. The covenant entered into on that November day on a ship 
at anchor in the wilderness harbor established the basis for self-government and 
the rule of law in the new land.