Introduction
"Math was always my worst subject."
"A million dollars, a billion, a trillion, whatever. It doesn't matter as long as we do something
about the problem."
"Jerry and I aren't going to Europe, what with all the terrorists."
Innumeracy, an inability to deal comfortably with the fundamental notions of number and
chance, plagues far too many otherwise knowledgeable citizens. The same people who cringe
when words such as "imply" and "infer" are confused react without a trace of embarrassment to
even the most egregious of numerical solecisms. I remember once listening to someone at a
party drone on about the difference between "continually" and "continuously." Later that
evening we were watching the news, and the TV weathercaster announced that there was a
50 percent chance of rain for Saturday and a 50 percent chance for Sunday, and concluded that
there was therefore a 100 percent chance of rain that weekend. The remark went right by the
self-styled grammarian, and even after I explained the mistake to him, he wasn't nearly as
indignant as he would have been had the weathercaster left a dangling participle. In fact, unlike
other failings which are hidden, mathematical illiteracy is often flaunted: "I can't even balance
my checkbook." "I'm a people person, not a numbers person." Or "I always hated math."
Part of the reason for this perverse pride in mathematical ignorance is that its consequences
are not usually as obvious as are those of other weaknesses. Because of this, and because I
firmly believe that people respond better to illustrative particulars than they do to general
exposition, this book will examine many real-world examples of innumeracy— stock scams,
choice of a spouse, newspaper psychics, diet and medical claims, the risk of terrorism, astrology,
sports records, elections, sex discrimination, UFOs, insurance and law, psychoanalysis,
parapsychology, lotteries, and drug testing among them.
I've tried not to pontificate excessively or to make too many sweeping generalizations about
popular culture or our educational system (a la Allan Bloom), but I have made a number of
general remarks and observations that I hope are supported by the examples. In my opinion,
some of the blocks to dealing comfortably with numbers and probabilities are due to quite natural
psychological responses to uncertainty, to coincidence, or to how a problem is framed. Others can
be attributed to anxiety, or to romantic misconceptions about the nature and importance of
mathematics.
One rarely discussed consequence of innumeracy is its link with belief in pseudoscience, and
the interrelationship between the two is here explored. In a society where genetic engineering,
laser technology, and microchip circuits are daily adding to our understanding of the world, it's
especially sad that a significant portion of our adult population still believes in Tarot cards,
channeling mediums, and crystal power.
Even more ominous is the gap between scientists' assessments of various risks and the
popular perceptions of those risks, a gap that threatens eventually to lead either to unfounded and
crippling anxieties or to impossible and economically paralyzing demands for risk-free guarantees.
Politicians are seldom a help in this regard since they deal with public opinion and are therefore
loath to clarify the likely hazards and trade-offs associated with almost any policy.
Because the book is largely concerned with various inadequacies—a lack of numerical
perspective, an exaggerated appreciation for meaningless coincidence, a credulous acceptance of
pseudosciences, an inability to recognize social trade-offs, and so on— much of the writing has a
debunking flavor to it. Nevertheless, I hope I've avoided the overly earnest and scolding tone
common to many such endeavors.
The approach throughout is gently mathematical, using some elementary ideas from
probability and statistics which, though deep in a sense, will require nothing more than
common sense and arithmetic. Some of the notions presented are rarely discussed in terms
accessible to a wide audience and are the kind of thing that my students, for example, often
enjoy but usually respond to with: "Will we need to know that for the quiz?" There won't be a
quiz, so they can be enjoyed freely, and the occasional difficult passage can be ignored with
impunity.
One contention of the book is that innumerate people characteristically have a strong
tendency to personalize—to be misled by their own experiences, or by the media's focus on
individuals and drama. From this it doesn't necessarily follow that mathematicians are
impersonal or formal. I'm not, and the book isn't either. My goal in writing it has been to
appeal to the educated but innumerate—at least to those whose fear of mathematics is not so
great that (num)(ber) is automatically read as (numb)(er). The book will have been well worth
the effort if it can begin to clarify just how much innumeracy pervades both our private and our
public lives.
1Examples and Principles
Two aristocrats are out horseback riding and one challenges the other to see which can come
up with the larger number. The second agrees to the contest, concentrates for a few minutes, and
proudly announces, "Three." The proposer of the game is quiet for half an hour, then finally
shrugs and concedes defeat.
A summer visitor enters a hardware store in Maine and buys a large number of expensive
items. The skeptical, reticent owner doesn't say a word as he adds the bill on the cash register.
When he's finished, he points to the total and watches as the man counts out $1,528.47. He then
methodically recounts the money once, twice, three times. The visitor finally asks if he's given
him the right amount of money, to which the Mainer grudgingly responds, "Just barely."
The mathematician G. H. Hardy was visiting his protege, the Indian mathematician
Ramanujan, in the hospital. To make small talk, he remarked that 1729, the number of the taxi
which had brought him, was a rather dull number, to which Ramanujan replied immediately, "No,
Hardy! No, Hardy! It is a very interesting number. It is the smallest number expressible as the sum
of two cubes in two different ways."
BIG NUMBERS, SMALL PROBABILITIES
People's facility with numbers ranges from the aristocratic to the Ramanujanian, but it's an
unfortunate fact that most are on the aristocrats' side of our old Mainer. I'm always amazed and
depressed when I encounter students who have no idea what the population of the United States
is, or the approximate distance from coast to coast, or roughly what percentage of the world is
Chinese. I sometimes ask them as an exercise to estimate how fast human hair grows in miles per
hour, or approximately how many people die on earth each day, or how many cigarettes are
smoked annually in this country. Despite some initial reluctance (one student maintained that
hair just doesn't grow in miles per hour), they often improve their feeling for numbers dramatically.
Without some appreciation of common large numbers, it's impossible to react with the proper
skepticism to terrifying reports that more than a million American kids are kidnapped each year,
or with the proper sobriety to a warhead carrying a megaton of explosive power—the equivalent of a
million tons (or two billion pounds) of TNT.
And if you don't have some feeling for probabilities, automobile accidents might seem a
relatively minor problem of local travel, whereas being killed by terrorists might seem to be a
major risk when going overseas. As often observed, however, the 45,000 people killed annually on
American roads are approximately equal in number to all American dead in the Vietnam War. On
the other hand, the seventeen Americans killed by terrorists in 1985 were among the 28 million of
us who traveled abroad that year—that's one chance in 1.6 million of becoming a victim. Compare
that with these annual rates in the United States: one chance in 68,000 of choking to death; one
chance in 75,000 of dying in a bicycle crash; one chance in 20,000 of drowning; and one chance in
only 5,300 of dying in a car crash.
Confronted with these large numbers and with the correspondingly small probabilities
associated with them, the innumerate will inevitably respond with the non sequitur, "Yes, but
what if you're that one," and then nod knowingly, as if they've demolished your argument with
their penetrating insight. This tendency to personalize is, as we'll see, a characteristic of many
people who suffer from innumeracy. Equally typical is a tendency to equate the risk from some
obscure and exotic malady with the chances of suffering from heart and circulatory disease,
from which about 12,000 Americans die each week.
There's a joke I like that's marginally relevant. An old married couple in their nineties
contact a divorce lawyer, who pleads with them to stay together. "Why get divorced now after
seventy years of marriage? Why not last it out? Why now?" The little old lady finally pipes up
in a creaky voice: "We wanted to wait until the children were dead."
A feeling for what quantities or time spans are appropriate in various contexts is essential
to getting the joke. Slipping between millions and billions or between billions and trillions
should in this sense be equally funny, but it isn't, because we too often lack an intuitive feeling
for these numbers. Many educated people have little grasp for these numbers and are even
unaware that a million is 1,000,000; a billion is 1,000,000,000; and a trillion,
1,000,000,000,000.
A recent study by Drs. Kronlund and Phillips of the University of Washington showed
that most doctors' assessments of the risks of various operations, procedures, and medications
(even in their own specialties) were way off the mark, often by several orders of magnitude. I
once had a conversation with a doctor who, within approximately twenty minutes, stated that
a certain procedure he was contemplating (a) had a one-chance-in-a-million risk associated with
it; (6) was 99 percent safe; and (c) usually went quite well. Given the fact that so many doctors
seem to believe that there must be at least eleven people in the waiting room if they're to avoid
being idle, I'm not surprised at this new evidence of their innumeracy.
For very big or very small numbers, so-called scientific notation is often clearer and easier
to work with than standard notation and I'll therefore sometimes use it. There's nothing very
tricky about it.
It is not exactly commonplace, but numbers like ten thousand, one
million, and a trillion are. Examples of collections each having a million elements, a billion
elements, and so on, should be at hand for quick comparison. For example, knowing that it
takes only about eleven and a half days for a million seconds to tick away, whereas almost
thirty-two years are required for a billion seconds to pass, gives one a better grasp of the
relative magnitudes of these two common numbers. What about trillions? Modern Homo sapiens
is probably less than 10 trillion seconds old; and the subsequent complete disappearance of the
Neanderthal version of early Homo sapiens occurred only a trillion or so seconds ago.
Agriculture's been here for approximately 300 billion seconds (ten thousand years), writing for
about 150 billion seconds, and rock music has been around for only about one billion seconds.
More common sources of such large numbers are the trillion-dollar federal budget and our
burgeoning weapons stockpiles. Given a U.S. population of about 250 million people, every
billion dollars in the federal budget translates into $4 for every American. Thus, an annual
Defense Department budget of almost a third of a trillion dollars amounts to approximately
$5,000 per year for a family of four. What have all these expenditures (ours and theirs) bought
over the years? The TNT equivalent of all the nuclear weapons in the world amounts to 25,000
megatons, or 50 trillion pounds, or 10,000 pounds for every man, woman, and child on earth.
(One pound in a car, incidentally, demolishes the car and kills everyone in it.) The nuclear
weapons on board just one of our Trident submarines contain eight times the firepower
expended in all of World War II.
To cite some happier illustrations for smaller numbers, the standard I use for the lowly
thousand is a section of Veterans Stadium in Philadelphia which I know contains 1,008 seats
and which is easy to picture. The north wall of a garage near my house contains almost exactly
ten thousand narrow bricks. For one hundred thousand, I generally think of the number of
words in a good-sized novel.
To get a handle on big numbers, it's useful to come up with one or two collections such as
the above corresponding to each power of ten, up to maybe 13 or 14. The more personal you can
make these collections, the better. It's also good practice to estimate whatever quantity piques
your curiosity: How many pizzas are consumed each year in the United States? How many
words have you spoken in your life? How many different people's names appear in The New
York Times each year? How many watermelons would fit inside the U.S. Capitol building?
Compute roughly how many acts of sexual intercourse occur each day in the world. Does the
number vary much from day to day? Estimate the number of potential human beings, given all the
human ova and sperm there have ever been, and you find that the ones who make it to
actuality are ipso facto incredibly, improbably fortunate.
These estimations are generally quite easy and often suggestive. For example, what is the
volume of all the human blood in the world? The average adult male has about six quarts of
blood, adult women slightly less, children considerably less. Thus, if we estimate that on
average each of the approximately 5 billion people in the world has about one gallon of blood,
we get about 5 billion gallons of blood in the world. 
Central Park in New York has an area of 840 acres, or about 1.3 square miles. If walls
were built about it, all the blood in the world would cover the park to a depth of something under 20
feet. The Dead Sea on the Israel-Jordan border has an area of 390 square miles. If all the world's
blood were put into the Dead Sea, it would add only three-fourths of an inch to its depth. Even
without any particular context, these figures are surprising; there isn't that much blood in the
world! Compare this with the volume of all the grass, or of all the leaves, or of all the algae in the
world, and man's marginal status among life forms, at least volume-wise, is vividly apparent.
Switching dimensions for a moment, consider the ratio of the speed of the supersonic
Concorde, which travels about 2,000 miles per hour, to that of a snail, which moves 25 feet per
hour, a pace equivalent to about .005 miles per hour. The Concorde's velocity is 400,000 times that
of the snail. An even more impressive ratio is that between the speed with which an average
computer adds ten-digit numbers and the rate at which human calculators do so. Computers perform
this task more than a million times faster than we do with our snail-like scratchings, and for
supercomputers the ratio is over a billion to one.
One last earthly calculation that a scientific consultant from M.I.T. uses to weed out prospective
employees during job interviews: How long, he asks, would it take dump trucks to cart away an
isolated mountain, say Japan's Mount Fuji, to ground level? Assume trucks come every fifteen
minutes, twenty-four hours a day, are instantaneously filled with mountain dirt and rock, and
leave without getting in each other's way. The answer's a little surprising and will be given later.
GARGANTUAN NUMBERS AND THE FORBES 400
A concern with scale has been a mainstay of world literature from the Bible to Swift's
Lilliputians, from Paul Bunyan to Rabelais' Gargantua. Yet it's always struck me how
inconsistent these various authors have been in their use of large numbers.
The infant Gargantua (whence "gargantuan") is said to have needed 17,913 cows to supply him
with milk. As a young student he traveled to Paris on a mare that was as large as six elephants,
and hung the bells of Notre Dame on the mare's neck as jingles. Returning home, he was attacked
by cannon fire from a castle, and combed the cannonballs from his hair with a 900-foot-long rake.
For a salad he cut lettuces as large as walnut trees, and devoured half a dozen pilgrims who'd
hidden among the trees. Can you determine the internal inconsistencies of this story?
The book of Genesis says of the Flood that ". . . all the high hills that were under the whole
heaven were covered ..." Taken literally, this seems to indicate that there were 10,000 to 20,000
feet of water on the surface of the earth, equivalent to more than half a billion cubic miles of liquid!
Since, according to biblical accounts, it rained for forty days and forty nights, or for only 960
hours, the rain must have fallen at a rate of at least fifteen feet per hour, certainly enough to sink
any aircraft carrier, much less an ark with thousands of animals on board.
Determining internal inconsistencies such as these is one of the minor pleasures of numeracy.
The point, however, is not that one should be perpetually analyzing numbers for their consistency
and plausibility, but that, when necessary, information can be gleaned from the barest numerical
facts, and claims can often be refuted on the basis of these raw numbers alone. If people were
more capable of estimation and simple calculation, many obvious inferences would be drawn (or
not), and fewer ridiculous notions would be entertained.
Before returning to Rabelais, let's consider two hanging wires of equal cross section. (This
latter sentence, I'm sure, has never before appeared in print.) The forces on the wires are
proportional to their masses, which are proportional to their lengths. Since the areas of the
cross sections of the supporting wires are equal, the stresses in the wire, force divided by
cross-sectional area, vary as the lengths of the wires. A wire ten times as long as another will
have ten times the stress of the shorter one. Similar arguments show that, of two geometrically
similar bridges of the same material, the larger one is necessarily the weaker of the two.
Likewise, a six-foot man cannot be scaled up to thirty feet, Rabelais notwithstanding.

There is a fundamental property of numbers named after the Greek mathematician
Archimedes which states that any number, no matter how huge, can be exceeded by adding
together sufficiently many of any smaller number, no matter how tiny. Though obvious in
principle, the consequences are sometimes resisted, as they were by the student of mine who
maintained that human hair just didn't grow in miles per hour. Unfortunately, the
nanoseconds used up in a simple computer operation do add up to lengthy bottlenecks on
intractable problems, many of which would require millennia to solve in general.